{\rtf1\windows \deff0{\fonttbl
{\f0\fswiss MS Sans Serif;}{\f1\fmodern Courier New;}{\f2\ftech Symbol;}}\fs20
\page #{\footnote hcAbout}${\footnote \pard{}About this help file}\pard{\fs24\b About this help file}\par\par\pard{}This file was made with the help of {\ul Makertf 3.12b-1}{\v hcMakertf} from the input file fileutils.texi.\par\par{{START-INFO-DIR-ENTRY\line
* File utilities: (fileutils).  GNU file utilities.\line
* chgrp: (fileutils)chgrp invocation.           Change file groups.\line
* chown: (fileutils)chown invocation.           Change file owners/groups.\line
* chmod: (fileutils)chmod invocation.           Change file permissions.\line
* cp: (fileutils)cp invocation.                 Copy files.\line
* dd: (fileutils)dd invocation.                 Copy and convert a file.\line
* df: (fileutils)df invocation.                 Report filesystem disk usage.\line
* dir: (fileutils)dir invocation.               List directories briefly.\line
* dircolors: (fileutils)dircolors invocation.   Color setup for ls.\line
* du: (fileutils)du invocation.                 Report on disk usage.\line
* install: (fileutils)install invocation.       Copy and change attributes.\line
* ln: (fileutils)ln invocation.                 Make links between files.\line
* ls: (fileutils)ls invocation.                 List directory contents.\line
* mkdir: (fileutils)mkdir invocation.           Create directories.\line
* mkfifo: (fileutils)mkfifo invocation.         Create FIFOs: (named pipes).\line
* mknod: (fileutils)mknod invocation.           Create special files.\line
* mv: (fileutils)mv invocation.                 Rename files.\line
* rm: (fileutils)rm invocation.                 Remove files.\line
* rmdir: (fileutils)rmdir invocation.           Remove empty directories.\line
* sync: (fileutils)sync invocation.             Synchronize memory and disk.\line
* touch: (fileutils)touch invocation.           Change file timestamps.\line
* vdir: (fileutils)vdir invocation.             List directories verbosely.\line
END-INFO-DIR-ENTRY\par
\pard{}}}\par
{\pard{}This file documents the GNU set of file utilities.\par
\par
\pard{}Copyright (C) 1994, 95, 96 Free Software Foundation, Inc.\par
\par
\pard{}Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are preserved on all copies.\par
\par
\pard{}Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a permission notice identical to this one.\par
\par
\pard{}Permission is granted to copy and distribute translations of this manual into another language, under the above conditions for modified versions, except that this permission notice may be stated in a translation approved by the Foundation.  }\par
\par
{\page\pard Node: {\b Top}, \keepn Next: {\uldb }{\v }, Prev: {\uldb }{\v }, Up: {\uldb (dir)}{\v Top @dir.hlp}\tab\tab{\uldb About this help file}{\v hcAbout}\line
K{\footnote K Top}
#{\footnote Top}
${\footnote \pard{}GNU file utilities}\par
\pard\pard{\fs24\b GNU file utilities}\par
\par
\pard{}{K{\footnote K file utilities}}{K{\footnote K utilities for file handling}} This manual minimally documents version 3.16 of the GNU file utilities.\par
\par
{\par
\pard\keep\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880{}{\uldb Introduction}{\v Introduction}\tab Caveats, overview, and authors.\par
{\uldb Common options}{\v Common_options}\tab Common options.\par
{\uldb File permissions}{\v File_permissions}\tab Access modes.\par
{\uldb Date input formats}{\v Date_input_formats}\tab Specifying date strings.\par
{\uldb Directory listing}{\v Directory_listing}\tab ls dir vdir d v dircolors\par
{\uldb Basic operations}{\v Basic_operations}\tab cp dd install mv rm\par
{\uldb Special file types}{\v Special_file_types}\tab ln mkdir rmdir mkfifo mknod\par
{\uldb Changing file attributes}{\v Changing_file_attributes}\tab chgrp chmod chown touch\par
{\uldb Disk usage}{\v Disk_usage}\tab df du sync\par
{\uldb Index}{\v Index}\tab General index.\par
\pard{}}}\par
\page\pard Node: {\b Introduction}, \keepn Next: {\uldb Common options}{\v Common_options}, Prev: {\uldb Top}{\v Top}, Up: {\uldb Top}{\v Top}\line
K{\footnote K Introduction}
#{\footnote Introduction}
${\footnote \pard{}Introduction}\par
\pard{\fs24\b Introduction}\par
\par
\pard{}{K{\footnote K introduction}} This manual is incomplete: No attempt is made to explain basic file concepts in a way suitable for novices.  Thus, if you are interested, please get involved in improving this manual.  The entire GNU community will benefit.\par
\par
\pard{}{K{\footnote K POSIX.2}}The GNU file utilities are mostly compatible with the {\scaps\fs16{}POSIX.2} standard.\par
\par
\pard{}{K{\footnote K bugs, reporting}}Please report bugs to {\f1{}fileutils-bugs@gnu.ai.mit.edu}.  Remember to include the version number, machine architecture, input files, and any other information needed to reproduce the bug: your input, what you expected, what you got, and why it is wrong.  Diffs are welcome, but please include a description of the problem as well, since this is sometimes difficult to infer. See {\uldb Bugs}{\v Bugs @gcc.hlp}.\par
\par
\pard{}{K{\footnote K history}}This manual is based on the Unix man pages in the distribution, which were originally written by David MacKenzie and updated by Jim Meyering.  Franc,ois Pinard did the initial conversion to Texinfo format.  Karl Berry did the indexing, some reorganization, and editing of the results.  Richard Stallman contributed his usual invaluable insights to the overall process.\par
\par
\page\pard Node: {\b Common options}, \keepn Next: {\uldb File permissions}{\v File_permissions}, Prev: {\uldb Introduction}{\v Introduction}, Up: {\uldb Top}{\v Top}\line
K{\footnote K Common options}
#{\footnote Common_options}
${\footnote \pard{}Common options}\par
\pard{\fs24\b Common options}\par
\par
\pard{}{K{\footnote K common options}} Certain options are available in all of these programs (in fact, every GNU program should accept them).  Rather than writing identical descriptions for each of the programs, they are described here.\par
\par
{\pard{}{\f1{}--help}\par
\pard\li720{}{K{\footnote K -help}}{K{\footnote K help, online}}Print a usage message listing all available options, then exit successfully.\par
\par
\pard{}{\f1{}--version}\par
\pard\li720{}{K{\footnote K -version}}{K{\footnote K version number, finding}}Print the version number, then exit successfully.\par
\pard{}}\par
{\par
\pard\keep\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880{}{\uldb Backup options}{\v Backup_options}\tab -b -S -V, in some programs.\par
\pard{}}\par
\page\pard Node: {\b Backup options}, \keepn Next: {\uldb }{\v }, Prev: {\uldb }{\v }, Up: {\uldb Common options}{\v Common_options}\line
K{\footnote K Backup options}
#{\footnote Backup_options}
${\footnote \pard{}Backup options}\par
\pard{\fs24\b Backup options}\par
\par
\pard{}{K{\footnote K backup options}} Some GNU programs (at least {\f1{}cp}, {\f1{}install}, {\f1{}ln}, and {\f1{}mv}) optionally make backups of files before writing new versions.  These options control the details of these backups.  The options are also briefly mentioned in the descriptions of the particular programs.\par
\par
{\pard{}{\f1{}-b}\par
\pard{}{\f1{}--backup}\par
\pard\li720{}{K{\footnote K -b}}{K{\footnote K -backup}}{K{\footnote K backups, making}}Make backups of files that are about to be overwritten or removed.  Without this option, the original versions are destroyed.\par
\par
\pard{}{\f1{}-S {\i suffix}}\par
\pard{}{\f1{}--suffix={\i suffix}}\par
\pard\li720{}{K{\footnote K -S}}{K{\footnote K -suffix}}{K{\footnote K backup suffix}}{K{\footnote K SIMPLE_BACKUP_SUFFIX}}Append {\i suffix} to each backup file made with {\f1{}-b}.  If this option is not specified, the value of the {\f1{}SIMPLE_BACKUP_SUFFIX} environment variable is used.  And if {\f1{}SIMPLE_BACKUP_SUFFIX} is not set, the default is {\f1{}~}, just as in Emacs.\par
\par
\pard{}{\f1{}-V {\i method}}\par
\pard{}{\f1{}--version-control={\i method}}\par
\pard\li720{}{K{\footnote K -V}}{K{\footnote K -version-control}}{K{\footnote K VERSION_CONTROL}}{K{\footnote K backup files, type made}}Use {\i method} to determine the type of backups made with {\f1{}-b}.  If this option is not specified, the value of the {\f1{}VERSION_CONTROL} environment variable is used.  And if {\f1{}VERSION_CONTROL} is not set, the default backup type is {\f1{}existing}.\par
\par
\pard\li720{}{K{\footnote K version-control Emacs variable}}This option corresponds to the Emacs variable {\f1{}version-control}; the same values for {\i method} are accepted as in Emacs.  This options also more descriptive name.  The valid {\i method}s (unique abbreviations are accepted):\par
\par
{\pard\li720{}{\f1{}t}\par
\pard\li720{}{\f1{}numbered}\par
\pard\li1440{}{K{\footnote K numbered backup method}}Always make numbered backups.\par
\par
\pard\li720{}{\f1{}nil}\par
\pard\li720{}{\f1{}existing}\par
\pard\li1440{}{K{\footnote K existing backup method}}Make numbered backups of files that already have them, simple backups of the others.\par
\par
\pard\li720{}{\f1{}never}\par
\pard\li720{}{\f1{}simple}\par
\pard\li1440{}{K{\footnote K simple backup method}}Always make simple backups.\par
\par
\pard\li720{}}\par
\pard{}}\par
\page\pard Node: {\b File permissions}, \keepn Next: {\uldb Date input formats}{\v Date_input_formats}, Prev: {\uldb Common options}{\v Common_options}, Up: {\uldb Top}{\v Top}\line
K{\footnote K File permissions}
#{\footnote File_permissions}
${\footnote \pard{}File permissions}\par
\pard{\fs24\b File permissions}\par
\par
\pard{}{K{\footnote K file permissions}}{K{\footnote K permissions of files}}\par
\par
\pard{}Each file has a set of \'A2permissions\'A2 that control the kinds of access that users have to that file.  The permissions for a file are also called its \'A2access mode\'A2.  They can be represented either in symbolic form or as an octal number.\par
\par
{\par
\pard\keep\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880{}{\uldb Mode Structure}{\v Mode_Structure}\tab Structure of file permissions.\par
{\uldb Symbolic Modes}{\v Symbolic_Modes}\tab Mnemonic permissions representation.\par
{\uldb Numeric Modes}{\v Numeric_Modes}\tab Permissions as octal numbers.\par
\pard{}}\par
\page\pard Node: {\b Mode Structure}, \keepn Next: {\uldb Symbolic Modes}{\v Symbolic_Modes}, Prev: {\uldb }{\v }, Up: {\uldb File permissions}{\v File_permissions}\line
K{\footnote K Mode Structure}
#{\footnote Mode_Structure}
${\footnote \pard{}Structure of File Permissions}\par
\pard{\fs24\b Structure of File Permissions}\par
\par
\pard{}There are three kinds of permissions that a user can have for a file:\par
\par
{\pard\fi-720\li720\tx144\tx720{}\tab{}1. \tab{}{K{\footnote K read permission}}permission to read the file.  For directories, this means permission to list the contents of the directory.\par
\par
\pard\fi-720\li720\tx144\tx720{}\tab{}2. \tab{}{K{\footnote K write permission}}permission to write to (change) the file.  For directories, this means permission to create and remove files in the directory.\par
\par
\pard\fi-720\li720\tx144\tx720{}\tab{}3. \tab{}{K{\footnote K execute permission}}permission to execute the file (run it as a program).  For directories, this means permission to access files in the directory.\par
\pard{}}\par
\pard{}There are three categories of users who may have different permissions to perform any of the above operations on a file:\par
\par
{\pard\fi-720\li720\tx144\tx720{}\tab{}1. \tab{}the file's owner;\par
\par
\pard\fi-720\li720\tx144\tx720{}\tab{}2. \tab{}other users who are in the file's group;\par
\par
\pard\fi-720\li720\tx144\tx720{}\tab{}3. \tab{}everyone else.\par
\pard{}}\par
\pard{}{K{\footnote K owner, default}}{K{\footnote K group owner, default}}Files are given an owner and group when they are created.  Usually the owner is the current user and the group is the group of the directory the file is in, but this varies with the operating system, the filesystem the file is created on, and the way the file is created.  You can change the owner and group of a file by using the {\f1{}chown} and {\f1{}chgrp} commands.\par
\par
\pard{}In addition to the three sets of three permissions listed above, a file's permissions have three special components, which affect only executable files (programs) and, on some systems, directories:\par
\par
{\pard\fi-720\li720\tx144\tx720{}\tab{}1. \tab{}{K{\footnote K setuid}}set the process's effective user ID to that of the file upon execution (called the \'A2setuid bit\'A2).  No effect on directories.\par
\par
\pard\fi-720\li720\tx144\tx720{}\tab{}2. \tab{}{K{\footnote K setgid}}set the process's effective group ID to that of the file upon execution (called the \'A2setgid bit\'A2).  For directories on some systems, put files created in the directory into the same group as the directory, no matter what group the user who creates them is in.\par
\par
\pard\fi-720\li720\tx144\tx720{}\tab{}3. \tab{}{K{\footnote K sticky}}{K{\footnote K swap space, saving text image in}}{K{\footnote K text image, saving in swap space}}{K{\footnote K append-only directories}}save the program's text image on the swap device so it will load more quickly when run (called the \'A2sticky bit\'A2).  For directories on some systems, prevent users from removing files that they do not own in the directory; this is called making the directory \'A2append-only\'A2.\par
\pard{}}\par
\page\pard Node: {\b Symbolic Modes}, \keepn Next: {\uldb Numeric Modes}{\v Numeric_Modes}, Prev: {\uldb Mode Structure}{\v Mode_Structure}, Up: {\uldb File permissions}{\v File_permissions}\line
K{\footnote K Symbolic Modes}
#{\footnote Symbolic_Modes}
${\footnote \pard{}Symbolic Modes}\par
\pard{\fs24\b Symbolic Modes}\par
\par
\pard{}{K{\footnote K symbolic modes}}\'A2Symbolic modes\'A2 represent changes to files' permissions as operations on single-character symbols.  They allow you to modify either all or selected parts of files' permissions, optionally based on their previous values, and perhaps on the current {\f1{}umask} as well (see {\uldb Umask and Protection}{\v Umask_and_Protection}).\par
\par
\pard{}The format of symbolic modes is:\par
\par
{\pard\li720\f1{}[ugoa...][[+-=][rwxXstugo...]...][,...]\par
\pard\f0{}}\par
\pard{}The following sections describe the operators and other details of symbolic modes.\par
\par
{\par
\pard\keep\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880{}{\uldb Setting Permissions}{\v Setting_Permissions}\tab Basic operations on permissions.\par
{\uldb Copying Permissions}{\v Copying_Permissions}\tab Copying existing permissions.\par
{\uldb Changing Special Permissions}{\v Changing_Special_Permissions}\tab Special permissions.\par
{\uldb Conditional Executability}{\v Conditional_Executability}\tab Conditionally affecting executability.\par
{\uldb Multiple Changes}{\v Multiple_Changes}\tab Making multiple changes.\par
{\uldb Umask and Protection}{\v Umask_and_Protection}\tab The effect of the umask.\par
\pard{}}\par
\page\pard Node: {\b Setting Permissions}, \keepn Next: {\uldb Copying Permissions}{\v Copying_Permissions}, Prev: {\uldb }{\v }, Up: {\uldb Symbolic Modes}{\v Symbolic_Modes}\line
K{\footnote K Setting Permissions}
#{\footnote Setting_Permissions}
${\footnote \pard{}Setting Permissions}\par
\pard{\fs24\b Setting Permissions}\par
\par
\pard{}The basic symbolic operations on a file's permissions are adding, removing, and setting the permission that certain users have to read, write, and execute the file.  These operations have the following format:\par
\par
{{\i \pard\li720\f1{}users} {\i operation} {\i permissions}\par
\pard\f0{}}\par
\pard{}The spaces between the three parts above are shown for readability only; symbolic modes can not contain spaces.\par
\par
\pard{}The {\i users} part tells which users' access to the file is changed.  It consists of one or more of the following letters (or it can be empty; see {\uldb Umask and Protection}{\v Umask_and_Protection}, for a description of what happens then).  When more than one of these letters is given, the order that they are in does not matter.\par
\par
{\pard{}{\f1{}u}\par
\pard\li720{}{K{\footnote K owner of file, permissions for}}the user who owns the file;\par
\par
\pard{}{\f1{}g}\par
\pard\li720{}{K{\footnote K group, permissions for}}other users who are in the file's group;\par
\par
\pard{}{\f1{}o}\par
\pard\li720{}{K{\footnote K other permissions}}all other users;\par
\par
\pard{}{\f1{}a}\par
\pard\li720{}all users; the same as {\f1{}ugo}.\par
\pard{}}\par
\pard{}The {\i operation} part tells how to change the affected users' access to the file, and is one of the following symbols:\par
\par
{\pard{}{\f1{}+}\par
\pard\li720{}{K{\footnote K adding permissions}}to add the {\i permissions} to whatever permissions the {\i users} already have for the file;\par
\par
\pard{}{\f1{}-}\par
\pard\li720{}{K{\footnote K removing permissions}}{K{\footnote K subtracting permissions}}to remove the {\i permissions} from whatever permissions the {\i users} already have for the file;\par
\par
\pard{}{\f1{}=}\par
\pard\li720{}{K{\footnote K setting permissions}}to make the {\i permissions} the only permissions that the {\i users} have for the file.\par
\pard{}}\par
\pard{}The {\i permissions} part tells what kind of access to the file should be changed; it is zero or more of the following letters.  As with the {\i users} part, the order does not matter when more than one letter is given.  Omitting the {\i permissions} part is useful only with the {\f1{}=} operation, where it gives the specified {\i users} no access at all to the file.\par
\par
{\pard{}{\f1{}r}\par
\pard\li720{}{K{\footnote K read permission, symbolic}}the permission the {\i users} have to read the file;\par
\par
\pard{}{\f1{}w}\par
\pard\li720{}{K{\footnote K write permission, symbolic}}the permission the {\i users} have to write to the file;\par
\par
\pard{}{\f1{}x}\par
\pard\li720{}{K{\footnote K execute permission, symbolic}}the permission the {\i users} have to execute the file.\par
\pard{}}\par
\pard{}For example, to give everyone permission to read and write a file, but not to execute it, use:\par
\par
{\pard\keep\li720\f1{}a=rw\par
\pard\f0{}}\par
\pard{}To remove write permission for from all users other than the file's owner, use:\par
\par
{\pard\keep\li720\f1{}go-w\par
\pard\f0{}}\par
\pard{}The above command does not affect the access that the owner of the file has to it, nor does it affect whether other users can read or execute the file.\par
\par
\pard{}To give everyone except a file's owner no permission to do anything with that file, use the mode below.  Other users could still remove the file, if they have write permission on the directory it is in.\par
\par
{\pard\keep\li720\f1{}go=\par
\pard\f0{}}\par
\pard{}Another way to specify the same thing is:\par
\par
{\pard\keep\li720\f1{}og-rxw\par
\pard\f0{}}\par
\page\pard Node: {\b Copying Permissions}, \keepn Next: {\uldb Changing Special Permissions}{\v Changing_Special_Permissions}, Prev: {\uldb Setting Permissions}{\v Setting_Permissions}, Up: {\uldb Symbolic Modes}{\v Symbolic_Modes}\line
K{\footnote K Copying Permissions}
#{\footnote Copying_Permissions}
${\footnote \pard{}Copying Existing Permissions}\par
\pard{\fs24\b Copying Existing Permissions}\par
\par
\pard{}{K{\footnote K copying existing permissions}}{K{\footnote K permissions, copying existing}}You can base a file's permissions on its existing permissions.  To do this, instead of using {\f1{}r}, {\f1{}w}, or {\f1{}x} after the operator, you use the letter {\f1{}u}, {\f1{}g}, or {\f1{}o}.  For example, the mode {\par
\pard\keep\li720\f1{}o+g\par
\pard\f0{}}\par
\pard{}adds the permissions for users who are in a file's group to the permissions that other users have for the file.  Thus, if the file started out as mode 664 ({\f1{}rw-rw-r--}), the above mode would change it to mode 666 ({\f1{}rw-rw-rw-}).  If the file had started out as mode 741 ({\f1{}rwxr----x}), the above mode would change it to mode 745 ({\f1{}rwxr--r-x}).  The {\f1{}-} and {\f1{}=} operations work analogously.\par
\par
\page\pard Node: {\b Changing Special Permissions}, \keepn Next: {\uldb Conditional Executability}{\v Conditional_Executability}, Prev: {\uldb Copying Permissions}{\v Copying_Permissions}, Up: {\uldb Symbolic Modes}{\v Symbolic_Modes}\line
K{\footnote K Changing Special Permissions}
#{\footnote Changing_Special_Permissions}
${\footnote \pard{}Changing Special Permissions}\par
\pard{\fs24\b Changing Special Permissions}\par
\par
\pard{}{K{\footnote K changing special permissions}}In addition to changing a file's read, write, and execute permissions, you can change its special permissions.  See {\uldb Mode Structure}{\v Mode_Structure}, for a summary of these permissions.\par
\par
\pard{}To change a file's permission to set the user ID on execution, use {\f1{}u} in the {\i users} part of the symbolic mode and {\f1{}s} in the {\i permissions} part.\par
\par
\pard{}To change a file's permission to set the group ID on execution, use {\f1{}g} in the {\i users} part of the symbolic mode and {\f1{}s} in the {\i permissions} part.\par
\par
\pard{}To change a file's permission to stay permanently on the swap device, use {\f1{}o} in the {\i users} part of the symbolic mode and {\f1{}t} in the {\i permissions} part.\par
\par
\pard{}For example, to add set user ID permission to a program, you can use the mode:\par
\par
{\pard\keep\li720\f1{}u+s\par
\pard\f0{}}\par
\pard{}To remove both set user ID and set group ID permission from it, you can use the mode:\par
\par
{\pard\keep\li720\f1{}ug-s\par
\pard\f0{}}\par
\pard{}To cause a program to be saved on the swap device, you can use the mode:\par
\par
{\pard\keep\li720\f1{}o+t\par
\pard\f0{}}\par
\pard{}Remember that the special permissions only affect files that are executable, plus, on some systems, directories (on which they have different meanings; see {\uldb Mode Structure}{\v Mode_Structure}).  Using {\f1{}a} in the {\i users} part of a symbolic mode does not cause the special permissions to be affected; thus,\par
\par
{\pard\keep\li720\f1{}a+s\par
\pard\f0{}}\par
\pard{}has {\i no effect}.  You must use {\f1{}u}, {\f1{}g}, and {\f1{}o} explicitly to affect the special permissions.  Also, the combinations {\f1{}u+t}, {\f1{}g+t}, and {\f1{}o+s} have no effect.\par
\par
\pard{}The {\f1{}=} operator is not very useful with special permissions; for example, the mode:\par
\par
{\pard\keep\li720\f1{}o=t\par
\pard\f0{}}\par
\pard{}does cause the file to be saved on the swap device, but it also removes all read, write, and execute permissions that users not in the file's group might have had for it.\par
\par
\page\pard Node: {\b Conditional Executability}, \keepn Next: {\uldb Multiple Changes}{\v Multiple_Changes}, Prev: {\uldb Changing Special Permissions}{\v Changing_Special_Permissions}, Up: {\uldb Symbolic Modes}{\v Symbolic_Modes}\line
K{\footnote K Conditional Executability}
#{\footnote Conditional_Executability}
${\footnote \pard{}Conditional Executability}\par
\pard{\fs24\b Conditional Executability}\par
\par
\pard{}{K{\footnote K conditional executability}}There is one more special type of symbolic permission: if you use {\f1{}X} instead of {\f1{}x}, execute permission is affected only if the file already had execute permission or is a directory.  It affects directories' execute permission even if they did not initially have any execute permissions set.\par
\par
\pard{}For example, this mode:\par
\par
{\pard\keep\li720\f1{}a+X\par
\pard\f0{}}\par
\pard{}gives all users permission to execute files (or search directories) if anyone could before.\par
\par
\page\pard Node: {\b Multiple Changes}, \keepn Next: {\uldb Umask and Protection}{\v Umask_and_Protection}, Prev: {\uldb Conditional Executability}{\v Conditional_Executability}, Up: {\uldb Symbolic Modes}{\v Symbolic_Modes}\line
K{\footnote K Multiple Changes}
#{\footnote Multiple_Changes}
${\footnote \pard{}Making Multiple Changes}\par
\pard{\fs24\b Making Multiple Changes}\par
\par
\pard{}{K{\footnote K multiple changes to permissions}}The format of symbolic modes is actually more complex than described above (see {\uldb Setting Permissions}{\v Setting_Permissions}).  It provides two ways to make multiple changes to files' permissions.\par
\par
\pard{}The first way is to specify multiple {\i operation} and {\i permissions} parts after a {\i users} part in the symbolic mode.\par
\par
\pard{}For example, the mode:\par
\par
{\pard\keep\li720\f1{}og+rX-w\par
\pard\f0{}}\par
\pard{}gives users other than the owner of the file read permission and, if it is a directory or if someone already had execute permission to it, gives them execute permission; and it also denies them write permission to it file.  It does not affect the permission that the owner of the file has for it.  The above mode is equivalent to the two modes:\par
\par
{\pard\keep\li720\f1{}og+rX\line
og-w\par
\pard\f0{}}\par
\pard{}The second way to make multiple changes is to specify more than one simple symbolic mode, separated by commas.  For example, the mode:\par
\par
{\pard\keep\li720\f1{}a+r,go-w\par
\pard\f0{}}\par
\pard{}gives everyone permission to read the file and removes write permission on it for all users except its owner.  Another example:\par
\par
{\pard\keep\li720\f1{}u=rwx,g=rx,o=\par
\pard\f0{}}\par
\pard{}sets all of the non-special permissions for the file explicitly.  (It gives users who are not in the file's group no permission at all for it.)\par
\par
\pard{}The two methods can be combined.  The mode:\par
\par
{\pard\keep\li720\f1{}a+r,g+x-w\par
\pard\f0{}}\par
\pard{}gives all users permission to read the file, and gives users who are in the file's group permission to execute it, as well, but not permission to write to it.  The above mode could be written in several different ways; another is:\par
\par
{\pard\keep\li720\f1{}u+r,g+rx,o+r,g-w\par
\pard\f0{}}\par
\page\pard Node: {\b Umask and Protection}, \keepn Next: {\uldb }{\v }, Prev: {\uldb Multiple Changes}{\v Multiple_Changes}, Up: {\uldb Symbolic Modes}{\v Symbolic_Modes}\line
K{\footnote K Umask and Protection}
#{\footnote Umask_and_Protection}
${\footnote \pard{}The Umask and Protection}\par
\pard{\fs24\b The Umask and Protection}\par
\par
\pard{}{K{\footnote K umask and modes}}{K{\footnote K modes and umask}}If the {\i users} part of a symbolic mode is omitted, it defaults to {\f1{}a} (affect all users), except that any permissions that are {\i set} in the system variable {\f1{}umask} are {\i not affected}.  The value of {\f1{}umask} can be set using the {\f1{}umask} command.  Its default value varies from system to system.\par
\par
\pard{}{K{\footnote K giving away permissions}}Omitting the {\i users} part of a symbolic mode is generally not useful with operations other than {\f1{}+}.  It is useful with {\f1{}+} because it allows you to use {\f1{}umask} as an easily customizable protection against giving away more permission to files than you intended to.\par
\par
\pard{}As an example, if {\f1{}umask} has the value 2, which removes write permission for users who are not in the file's group, then the mode:\par
\par
{\pard\keep\li720\f1{}+w\par
\pard\f0{}}\par
\pard{}adds permission to write to the file to its owner and to other users who are in the file's group, but {\i not} to other users.  In contrast, the mode:\par
\par
{\pard\keep\li720\f1{}a+w\par
\pard\f0{}}\par
\pard{}ignores {\f1{}umask}, and {\i does} give write permission for the file to all users.\par
\par
\page\pard Node: {\b Numeric Modes}, \keepn Next: {\uldb }{\v }, Prev: {\uldb Symbolic Modes}{\v Symbolic_Modes}, Up: {\uldb File permissions}{\v File_permissions}\line
K{\footnote K Numeric Modes}
#{\footnote Numeric_Modes}
${\footnote \pard{}Numeric Modes}\par
\pard{\fs24\b Numeric Modes}\par
\par
\pard{}{K{\footnote K numeric modes}}{K{\footnote K file permissions, numeric}}{K{\footnote K octal numbers for file modes}}File permissions are stored internally as 16 bit integers.  As an alternative to giving a symbolic mode, you can give an octal (base 8) number that corresponds to the internal representation of the new mode.  This number is always interpreted in octal; you do not have to add a leading 0, as you do in C.  Mode 0055 is the same as mode 55.\par
\par
\pard{}A numeric mode is usually shorter than the corresponding symbolic mode, but it is limited in that it can not take into account a file's previous permissions; it can only set them absolutely.\par
\par
\pard{}The permissions granted to the user, to other users in the file's group, and to other users not in the file's group are each stored as three bits, which are represented as one octal digit.  The three special permissions are also each stored as one bit, and they are as a group represented as another octal digit.  Here is how the bits are arranged in the 16 bit integer, starting with the lowest valued bit:\par
\par
{\pard\keep\li720\f1{}Value in  Corresponding\line
Mode      Permission\line
\line
          Other users not in the file's group:\line
   1      Execute\line
   2      Write\line
   4      Read\line
\line
          Other users in the file's group:\line
  10      Execute\line
  20      Write\line
  40      Read\line
\line
          The file's owner:\line
 100      Execute\line
 200      Write\line
 400      Read\line
\line
          Special permissions:\line
1000      Save text image on swap device\line
2000      Set group ID on execution\line
4000      Set user ID on execution\par
\pard\f0{}}\par
\pard{}For example, numeric mode 4755 corresponds to symbolic mode {\f1{}u=rwxs,go=rx}, and numeric mode 664 corresponds to symbolic mode {\f1{}ug=rw,o=r}.  Numeric mode 0 corresponds to symbolic mode {\f1{}ugo=}.\par
\par
\page\pard Node: {\b Date input formats}, \keepn Next: {\uldb Directory listing}{\v Directory_listing}, Prev: {\uldb File permissions}{\v File_permissions}, Up: {\uldb Top}{\v Top}\line
K{\footnote K Date input formats}
#{\footnote Date_input_formats}
${\footnote \pard{}Date input formats}\par
\pard{\fs24\b Date input formats}\par
\par
\pard{}{K{\footnote K date input formats}}{K{\footnote K getdate}} {\par
\pard\li720{}Our units of temporal measurement, from seconds on up to months, are so complicated, asymmetrical and disjunctive so as to make coherent mental reckoning in time all but impossible.  Indeed, had some tyrannical god contrived to enslave our minds to time, to make it all but impossible for us to escape subjection to sodden routines and unpleasant surprises, he could hardly have done better than handing down our present system.  It is like a set of trapezoidal building blocks, with no vertical or horizontal surfaces, like a language in which the simplest thought demands ornate constructions, useless particles and lengthy circumlocutions.  Unlike the more successful patterns of language and science, which enable us to face experience boldly or at least level-headedly, our system of temporal calculation silently and persistently encourages our terror of time.\par
\par
\pard\li720{}...  It is as though architects had to measure length in feet, width in meters and height in ells; as though basic instruction manuals demanded a knowledge of five different languages.  It is no wonder then that we often look into our own immediate past or future, last Tuesday or a week from Sunday, with feelings of helpless confusion.  ...\par
\par
\pard\li720{}-- Robert Grudin, {\i Time and the Art of Living}.\par
\pard{}}\par
\pard{}This section describes the textual date representations that GNU programs accept.  These are the strings you, as a user, can supply as arguments to the various programs.  The C interface (via the {\f1{}getdate} function) is not described here.\par
\par
\pard{}{K{\footnote K beginning of time, for Unix}}{K{\footnote K epoch, for Unix}}Although the date syntax here can represent any possible time since zero A.D., computer integers are not big enough for such a (comparatively) long time.  The earliest date semantically allowed on Unix systems is midnight, 1 January 1970 UCT.\par
\par
{\par
\pard\keep\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880{}{\uldb General date syntax}{\v General_date_syntax}\tab Common rules.\par
{\uldb Calendar date item}{\v Calendar_date_item}\tab 19 Dec 1994.\par
{\uldb Time of day item}{\v Time_of_day_item}\tab 9:20pm.\par
{\uldb Timezone item}{\v Timezone_item}\tab EST, DST, BST, UCT, AHST, ...\par
{\uldb Day of week item}{\v Day_of_week_item}\tab Monday and others.\par
{\uldb Relative item in date strings}{\v Relative_item_in_date_strings}\tab next tuesday, 2 years ago.\par
{\uldb Pure numbers in date strings}{\v Pure_numbers_in_date_strings}\tab 19931219, 1440.\par
{\uldb Authors of getdate}{\v Authors_of_getdate}\tab Bellovin, Salz, Berets, et al.\par
\pard{}}\par
\page\pard Node: {\b General date syntax}, \keepn Next: {\uldb Calendar date item}{\v Calendar_date_item}, Prev: {\uldb }{\v }, Up: {\uldb Date input formats}{\v Date_input_formats}\line
K{\footnote K General date syntax}
#{\footnote General_date_syntax}
${\footnote \pard{}General date syntax}\par
\pard{\fs24\b General date syntax}\par
\par
\pard{}{K{\footnote K general date syntax}} {K{\footnote K items in date strings}}A \'A2date\'A2 is a string, possibly empty, containing many items separated by whitespace.  The whitespace may be omitted when no ambiguity arises.  The empty string means the beginning of today (i.e., midnight).  Order of the items is immaterial.  A date string may contain many flavors of items:\par
\par
{\pard\fi-720\li720\tx144\tx720{}\tab{}{\f2\'B7}\tab{}calendar date items\par
\par
\pard\fi-720\li720\tx144\tx720{}\tab{}{\f2\'B7}\tab{}time of the day items\par
\par
\pard\fi-720\li720\tx144\tx720{}\tab{}{\f2\'B7}\tab{}time zone items\par
\par
\pard\fi-720\li720\tx144\tx720{}\tab{}{\f2\'B7}\tab{}day of the week items\par
\par
\pard\fi-720\li720\tx144\tx720{}\tab{}{\f2\'B7}\tab{}relative items\par
\par
\pard\fi-720\li720\tx144\tx720{}\tab{}{\f2\'B7}\tab{}pure numbers.\par
\pard{}}\par
\pard{}We describe each of these item types in turn, below.\par
\par
\pard{}{K{\footnote K numbers, written-out}}{K{\footnote K ordinal numbers}}{K{\footnote K first in date strings}}{K{\footnote K next in date strings}}{K{\footnote K last in date strings}}A few numbers may be written out in words in most contexts.  This is most useful for specifying day of the week items or relative items (see below).  Here is the list: {\f1{}first} for 1, {\f1{}next} for 2, {\f1{}third} for 3, {\f1{}fourth} for 4, {\f1{}fifth} for 5, {\f1{}sixth} for 6, {\f1{}seventh} for 7, {\f1{}eighth} for 8, {\f1{}ninth} for 9, {\f1{}tenth} for 10, {\f1{}eleventh} for 11 and {\f1{}twelfth} for 12.  Also, {\f1{}last} means exactly -1.\par
\par
\pard{}{K{\footnote K months, written-out}}When a month is written this way, it is still considered to be written numerically, instead of being "spelled in full"; this changes the allowed strings.\par
\par
\pard{}{K{\footnote K case, ignored in dates}}{K{\footnote K comments, in dates}}Alphabetic case is completely ignored in dates.  Comments may be introduced between round parentheses, as long as included parentheses are properly nested.  Hyphens not followed by a digit are currently ignored.  Leading zeros on numbers are ignored.\par
\par
\page\pard Node: {\b Calendar date item}, \keepn Next: {\uldb Time of day item}{\v Time_of_day_item}, Prev: {\uldb General date syntax}{\v General_date_syntax}, Up: {\uldb Date input formats}{\v Date_input_formats}\line
K{\footnote K Calendar date item}
#{\footnote Calendar_date_item}
${\footnote \pard{}Calendar date item}\par
\pard{\fs24\b Calendar date item}\par
\par
\pard{}{K{\footnote K calendar date item}} A \'A2calendar date item\'A2 specifies a day of the year.  It is specified differently, depending on whether the month is specified numerically or literally.  All these strings specify the same calendar date:\par
\par
{\pard\keep\li720\f1{}1970-09-17           # ISO 8601.\line
70-9-17              # This century assumed by default.\line
70-09-17             # Leading zeros are ignored.\line
9/17/72              # Common U.S. writing.\line
24 September 1972\line
24 Sept 72           # September has a special abbreviation.\line
24 Sep 72            # Three-letter abbreviations always allowed.\line
Sep 24, 1972\line
24-sep-72\line
24sep72\par
\pard\f0{}}\par
\pard{}The year can also be omitted.  In this case, the last specified year is used, or the current year if none.  For example:\par
\par
{\pard\keep\li720\f1{}9/17\line
sep 17\par
\pard\f0{}}\par
\pard{}Here are the rules.\par
\par
\pard{}{K{\footnote K ISO 8601 date format}}{K{\footnote K date format, ISO 8601}}For numeric months, the ISO 8601 format {\f1{}{\i year}-{\i month}-{\i day}} is allowed, where {\i year} is any positive number, {\i month} is a number between 01 and 12, and {\i day} is a number between 01 and 31.  A leading zero must be present if a number is less than ten.  If {\i year} is less than 100, then 1900 is added to it to force a date in this century.  The construct {\f1{}{\i month}/{\i day}/{\i year}}, popular in the United States, is accepted.  Also {\f1{}{\i month}/{\i day}}, omitting the year.\par
\par
\pard{}{K{\footnote K month names in date strings}}{K{\footnote K abbreviations for months}}Literal months may be spelled out in full: {\f1{}January}, {\f1{}February}, {\f1{}March}, {\f1{}April}, {\f1{}May}, {\f1{}June}, {\f1{}July}, {\f1{}August}, {\f1{}September}, {\f1{}October}, {\f1{}November} or {\f1{}December}.  Literal months may be abbreviated to their first three letters, possibly followed by an abbreviating dot.  It is also permitted to write {\f1{}Sept} instead of {\f1{}September}.\par
\par
\pard{}When months are written literally, the calendar date may be given as any of the following:\par
\par
{{\i \pard\li720\f1{}day} {\i month} {\i year}\line
{\i day} {\i month}\line
{\i month} {\i day} {\i year}\line
{\i day}-{\i month}-{\i year}\par
\pard\f0{}}\par
\pard{}Or, omitting the year:\par
\par
{{\i \pard\li720\f1{}month} {\i day}\par
\pard\f0{}}\par
\page\pard Node: {\b Time of day item}, \keepn Next: {\uldb Timezone item}{\v Timezone_item}, Prev: {\uldb Calendar date item}{\v Calendar_date_item}, Up: {\uldb Date input formats}{\v Date_input_formats}\line
K{\footnote K Time of day item}
#{\footnote Time_of_day_item}
${\footnote \pard{}Time of day item}\par
\pard{\fs24\b Time of day item}\par
\par
\pard{}{K{\footnote K time of day item}} A \'A2time of day item\'A2 in date strings specifies the time on a given day.  Here are some examples, all of which represent the same time:\par
\par
{\pard\keep\li720\f1{}20:02:0\line
20:02\line
8:02pm\line
20:02-0500      # In EST (Eastern U.S. Standard Time).\par
\pard\f0{}}\par
\pard{}More generally, the time of the day may be given as {\f1{}{\i hour}:{\i minute}:{\i second}}, where {\i hour} is a number between 0 and 23, {\i minute} is a number between 0 and 59, and {\i second} is a number between 0 and 59.  Alternatively, {\f1{}:{\i second}} can be omitted, in which case it is taken to be zero.\par
\par
\pard{}{K{\footnote K am in date strings}}{K{\footnote K pm in date strings}}{K{\footnote K midnight in date strings}}{K{\footnote K noon in date strings}}If the time is followed by {\f1{}am} or {\f1{}pm} (or {\f1{}a.m.} or {\f1{}p.m.}), {\i hour} is restricted to run from 1 to 12, and {\f1{}:{\i minute}} may be omitted (taken to be zero).  {\f1{}am} indicates the first half of the day, {\f1{}pm} indicates the second half of the day.  In this notation, 12 is the predecessor of 1: midnight is {\f1{}12am} while noon is {\f1{}12pm}.\par
\par
\pard{}{K{\footnote K timezone correction}}{K{\footnote K minutes, timezone correction by}}The time may alternatively be followed by a timezone correction, expressed as {\f1{}{\i s}{\i hh}{\i mm}}, where {\i s} is {\f1{}+} or {\f1{}-}, {\i hh} is a number of zone hours and {\i mm} is a number of zone minutes.  When a timezone correction is given this way, it forces interpretation of the time in UTC, overriding any previous specification for the timezone or the local timezone.  The {\i minute} part of the time of the day may not be elided when a timezone correction is used.  This is the only way to specify a timezone correction by fractional parts of an hour.\par
\par
\pard{}Either {\f1{}am}/{\f1{}pm} or a timezone correction may be specified, but not both.\par
\par
\page\pard Node: {\b Timezone item}, \keepn Next: {\uldb Day of week item}{\v Day_of_week_item}, Prev: {\uldb Time of day item}{\v Time_of_day_item}, Up: {\uldb Date input formats}{\v Date_input_formats}\line
K{\footnote K Timezone item}
#{\footnote Timezone_item}
${\footnote \pard{}Timezone item}\par
\pard{\fs24\b Timezone item}\par
\par
\pard{}{K{\footnote K timezone item}} A \'A2timezone item\'A2 specifies an international timezone, indicated by a small set of letters.  Any included period is ignored.  Military timezone designations use a single letter.  Currently, only integral zone hours may be represented in a timezone item.  See the previous section for a finer control over the timezone correction.\par
\par
\pard{}Here are many non-daylight-savings-time timezones, indexed by the zone hour value.\par
\par
{\pard{}+000\par
\pard\li720{}{K{\footnote K Greenwich Mean Time}}{K{\footnote K Universal Coordinated Time}}{K{\footnote K Western European Time}}{\f1{}GMT} for Greenwich Mean, {\f1{}UT} or {\f1{}UTC} for Universal (Coordinated), {\f1{}WET} for Western European and {\f1{}Z} for militaries.\par
\par
\pard{}+100\par
\pard\li720{}{K{\footnote K West African Time}}{\f1{}WAT} for West Africa and {\f1{}A} for militaries.\par
\par
\pard{}+200\par
\pard\li720{}{K{\footnote K Azores Time}}{\f1{}AT} for Azores and {\f1{}B} for militaries.\par
\par
\pard{}+300\par
{\f1{}\pard\li720{}C} for militaries.\par
\par
\pard{}+400\par
\pard\li720{}{K{\footnote K Atlantic Standard Time}}{\f1{}AST} for Atlantic Standard and {\f1{}D} for militaries.\par
\par
\pard{}+500\par
\pard\li720{}{K{\footnote K Eastern Standard Time}}{\f1{}E} for militaries and {\f1{}EST} for Eastern Standard.\par
\par
\pard{}+600\par
\pard\li720{}{K{\footnote K Central Standard Time}}{\f1{}CST} for Central Standard and {\f1{}F} for militaries.\par
\par
\pard{}+700\par
\pard\li720{}{K{\footnote K Mountain Standard Time}}{\f1{}G} for militaries and {\f1{}MST} for Mountain Standard.\par
\par
\pard{}+800\par
\pard\li720{}{K{\footnote K Pacific Standard Time}}{\f1{}H} for militaries and {\f1{}PST} for Pacific Standard.\par
\par
\pard{}+900\par
\pard\li720{}{K{\footnote K Yukon Standard Time}}{\f1{}I} for militaries and {\f1{}YST} for Yukon Standard.\par
\par
\pard{}+1000\par
\pard\li720{}{K{\footnote K Alaska-Hawaii Time}}{K{\footnote K Central Alaska Time}}{K{\footnote K Hawaii Standard Time}}{\f1{}AHST} for Alaska-Hawaii Standard, {\f1{}CAT} for Central Alaska, {\f1{}HST} for Hawaii Standard and {\f1{}K} for militaries.\par
\par
\pard{}+1100\par
\pard\li720{}{K{\footnote K Nome Standard Time}}{\f1{}L} for militaries and {\f1{}NT} for Nome.\par
\par
\pard{}+1200\par
\pard\li720{}{K{\footnote K International Date Line West}}{\f1{}IDLW} for International Date Line West and {\f1{}M} for militaries.\par
\par
\pard{}-100\par
\pard\li720{}{K{\footnote K Central European Time}}{K{\footnote K Middle European Time}}{K{\footnote K Middle European Winter Time}}{K{\footnote K French Winter Time}}{K{\footnote K Swedish Winter Time}}{\f1{}CET} for Central European, {\f1{}FWT} for French Winter, {\f1{}MET} for Middle European, {\f1{}MEWT} for Middle European Winter, {\f1{}N} for militaries and {\f1{}SWT} for Swedish Winter.\par
\par
\pard{}-200\par
\pard\li720{}{K{\footnote K Eastern European Time}}{K{\footnote K USSR Zone}}{\f1{}EET} for Eastern European, USSR Zone 1 and {\f1{}O} for militaries.\par
\par
\pard{}-300\par
\pard\li720{}{K{\footnote K Baghdad Time}}{\f1{}BT} for Baghdad, USSR Zone 2 and {\f1{}P} for militaries.\par
\par
\pard{}-400\par
{\f1{}\pard\li720{}Q} for militaries and {\f1{}ZP4} for USSR Zone 3.\par
\par
\pard{}-500\par
{\f1{}\pard\li720{}R} for militaries and {\f1{}ZP5} for USSR Zone 4.\par
\par
\pard{}-600\par
{\f1{}\pard\li720{}S} for militaries and {\f1{}ZP6} for USSR Zone 5.\par
\par
\pard{}-700\par
\pard\li720{}{K{\footnote K West Australian Standard Time}}{\f1{}T} for militaries and {\f1{}WAST} for West Australian Standard.\par
\par
\pard{}-800\par
\pard\li720{}{K{\footnote K China Coast Time}}{\f1{}CCT} for China Coast, USSR Zone 7 and {\f1{}U} for militaries.\par
\par
\pard{}-900\par
\pard\li720{}{K{\footnote K Japan Standard Time}}{\f1{}JST} for Japan Standard, USSR Zone 8 and {\f1{}V} for militaries.\par
\par
\pard{}-1000\par
\pard\li720{}{K{\footnote K East Australian Standard Time}}{K{\footnote K Guam Standard Time}}{\f1{}EAST} for East Australian Standard, {\f1{}GST} for Guam Standard, USSR Zone 9 and {\f1{}W} for militaries.\par
\par
\pard{}-1100\par
{\f1{}\pard\li720{}X} for militaries.\par
\par
\pard{}-1200\par
\pard\li720{}{K{\footnote K International Date Line East}}{K{\footnote K New Zealand Standard Time}}{\f1{}IDLE} for International Date Line East, {\f1{}NZST} for New Zealand Standard, {\f1{}NZT} for New Zealand and {\f1{}Y} for militaries.\par
\pard{}}\par
\pard{}{K{\footnote K daylight savings time}}Here are many DST timezones, indexed by the zone hour value.  Also, by following a non-DST timezone by the string {\f1{}DST} in a separate word (that is, separated by some whitespace), the corresponding DST timezone may be specified.\par
\par
{\pard{}0\par
{\f1{}\pard\li720{}BST} for British Summer.\par
\par
\pard{}+400\par
{\f1{}\pard\li720{}ADT} for Atlantic Daylight.\par
\par
\pard{}+500\par
{\f1{}\pard\li720{}EDT} for Eastern Daylight.\par
\par
\pard{}+600\par
{\f1{}\pard\li720{}CDT} for Central Daylight.\par
\par
\pard{}+700\par
{\f1{}\pard\li720{}MDT} for Mountain Daylight.\par
\par
\pard{}+800\par
{\f1{}\pard\li720{}PDT} for Pacific Daylight.\par
\par
\pard{}+900\par
{\f1{}\pard\li720{}YDT} for Yukon Daylight.\par
\par
\pard{}+1000\par
{\f1{}\pard\li720{}HDT} for Hawaii Daylight.\par
\par
\pard{}-100\par
{\f1{}\pard\li720{}MEST} for Middle European Summer, {\f1{}MESZ} for Middle European Summer, {\f1{}SST} for Swedish Summer and {\f1{}FST} for French Summer.\par
\par
\pard{}-700\par
{\f1{}\pard\li720{}WADT} for West Australian Daylight.\par
\par
\pard{}-1000\par
{\f1{}\pard\li720{}EADT} for Eastern Australian Daylight.\par
\par
\pard{}-1200\par
{\f1{}\pard\li720{}NZDT} for New Zealand Daylight.\par
\pard{}}\par
\page\pard Node: {\b Day of week item}, \keepn Next: {\uldb Relative item in date strings}{\v Relative_item_in_date_strings}, Prev: {\uldb Timezone item}{\v Timezone_item}, Up: {\uldb Date input formats}{\v Date_input_formats}\line
K{\footnote K Day of week item}
#{\footnote Day_of_week_item}
${\footnote \pard{}Day of week item}\par
\pard{\fs24\b Day of week item}\par
\par
\pard{}{K{\footnote K day of week item}} The explicit mention of a day of the week will forward the date (only if necessary) to reach that day of the week in the future.\par
\par
\pard{}Days of the week may be spelled out in full: {\f1{}Sunday}, {\f1{}Monday}, {\f1{}Tuesday}, {\f1{}Wednesday}, {\f1{}Thursday}, {\f1{}Friday} or {\f1{}Saturday}.  Days may be abbreviated to their first three letters, optionally followed by a period.  The special abbreviations {\f1{}Tues} for {\f1{}Tuesday}, {\f1{}Wednes} for {\f1{}Wednesday} and {\f1{}Thur} or {\f1{}Thurs} for {\f1{}Thursday} are also allowed.\par
\par
\pard{}{K{\footnote K next {\i day}}}{K{\footnote K last {\i day}}}A number may precede a day of the week item to move forward supplementary weeks.  It is best used in expression like {\f1{}third monday}.  In this context, {\f1{}last {\i day}} or {\f1{}next {\i day}} is also acceptable; they move one week before or after the day that {\i day} by itself would represent.\par
\par
\pard{}A comma following a day of the week item is ignored.\par
\par
\page\pard Node: {\b Relative item in date strings}, \keepn Next: {\uldb Pure numbers in date strings}{\v Pure_numbers_in_date_strings}, Prev: {\uldb Day of week item}{\v Day_of_week_item}, Up: {\uldb Date input formats}{\v Date_input_formats}\line
K{\footnote K Relative item in date strings}
#{\footnote Relative_item_in_date_strings}
${\footnote \pard{}Relative item in date strings}\par
\pard{\fs24\b Relative item in date strings}\par
\par
\pard{}{K{\footnote K relative items in date strings}}{K{\footnote K displacement of dates}} \'A2Relative items\'A2 adjust a date (or the current date if none) forward or backward.  The effects of relative items accumulate.  Here are some examples:\par
\par
{\pard\keep\li720\f1{}1 year\line
1 year ago\line
3 years\line
2 days\par
\pard\f0{}}\par
\pard{}{K{\footnote K year in date strings}}{K{\footnote K month in date strings}}{K{\footnote K fortnight in date strings}}{K{\footnote K week in date strings}}{K{\footnote K day in date strings}}{K{\footnote K hour in date strings}}{K{\footnote K minute in date strings}}The unit of time displacement may be selected by the string {\f1{}year} or {\f1{}month} for moving by whole years or months.  These are fuzzy units, as years and months are not all of equal duration.  More precise units are {\f1{}fortnight} which is worth 14 days, {\f1{}week} worth 7 days, {\f1{}day} worth 24 hours, {\f1{}hour} worth 60 minutes, {\f1{}minute} or {\f1{}min} worth 60 seconds, and {\f1{}second} or {\f1{}sec} worth one second.  An {\f1{}s} suffix on these units is accepted and ignored.\par
\par
\pard{}{K{\footnote K ago in date strings}}The unit of time may be preceded by a multiplier, given as an optionally signed number.  Unsigned numbers are taken as positively signed.  No number at all implies 1 for a multiplier.  Following a relative item by the string {\f1{}ago} is equivalent to preceding the unit by a multiplicator with value -1.\par
\par
\pard{}{K{\footnote K day in date strings}}{K{\footnote K tomorrow in date strings}}{K{\footnote K yesterday in date strings}}The string {\f1{}tomorrow} is worth one day in the future (equivalent to {\f1{}day}), the string {\f1{}yesterday} is worth one day in the past (equivalent to {\f1{}day ago}).\par
\par
\pard{}{K{\footnote K now in date strings}}{K{\footnote K today in date strings}}{K{\footnote K this in date strings}}The strings {\f1{}now} or {\f1{}today} are relative items corresponding to zero-valued time displacement, these strings come from the fact a zero-valued time displacement represents the current time when not otherwise change by previous items.  They may be used to stress other items, like in {\f1{}12:00 today}.  The string {\f1{}this} also has the meaning of a zero-valued time displacement, but is preferred in date strings like {\f1{}this thursday}.\par
\par
\pard{}When a relative item makes the resulting date to cross the boundary between DST and non-DST (or vice-versa), the hour is adjusted according to the local time.\par
\par
\page\pard Node: {\b Pure numbers in date strings}, \keepn Next: {\uldb Authors of getdate}{\v Authors_of_getdate}, Prev: {\uldb Relative item in date strings}{\v Relative_item_in_date_strings}, Up: {\uldb Date input formats}{\v Date_input_formats}\line
K{\footnote K Pure numbers in date strings}
#{\footnote Pure_numbers_in_date_strings}
${\footnote \pard{}Pure numbers in date strings}\par
\pard{\fs24\b Pure numbers in date strings}\par
\par
\pard{}{K{\footnote K pure numbers in date strings}} The precise intepretation of a pure decimal number is dependent of the context in the date string.\par
\par
\pard{}If the decimal number is of the form {\i yyyy}{\i mm}{\i dd} and no other calendar date item (see {\uldb Calendar date item}{\v Calendar_date_item}) appears before it in the date string, then {\i yyyy} is read as the year, {\i mm} as the month number and {\i dd} as the day of the month, for the specified calendar date.\par
\par
\pard{}If the decimal number is of the form {\i hh}{\i mm} and no other time of day item appears before it in the date string, then {\i hh} is read as the hour of the day and {\i mm} as the minute of the hour, for the specified time of the day.  {\i mm} can also be omitted.\par
\par
\pard{}If both a calendar date and a time of day appear to the left of a number in the date string, but no relative item, then the number overrides the year.\par
\par
\page\pard Node: {\b Authors of getdate}, \keepn Next: {\uldb }{\v }, Prev: {\uldb Pure numbers in date strings}{\v Pure_numbers_in_date_strings}, Up: {\uldb Date input formats}{\v Date_input_formats}\line
K{\footnote K Authors of getdate}
#{\footnote Authors_of_getdate}
${\footnote \pard{}Authors of {\f1{}getdate}}\par
\pard{\fs24\b Authors of {\f1{}getdate}}\par
\par
\pard{}{K{\footnote K authors of {\f1{}getdate}}} {K{\footnote K Bellovin, Steven M.}}{K{\footnote K Salz, Rich}}{K{\footnote K Berets, Jim}}{K{\footnote K MacKenzie, David}}{K{\footnote K Meyering, Jim}}{\f1{}getdate} was originally implemented by Steven M. Bellovin ({\f1{}smb@research.att.com}) while at the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill.  The code was later tweaked by a couple of people on Usenet, then completely overhauled by Rich $alz ({\f1{}rsalz@bbn.com}) and Jim Berets ({\f1{}jberets@bbn.com}) in August, 1990.  Various revisions for the GNU system were made by David MacKenzie, Jim Meyering, and others.\par
\par
\pard{}{K{\footnote K Pinard, F.}}{K{\footnote K Berry, K.}}This chapter was originally produced by Franc,ois Pinard ({\f1{}pinard@iro.umontreal.ca}) from the {\f1{}getdate.y} source code, and then edited by K. Berry ({\f1{}kb@cs.umb.edu}).\par
\par
\page\pard Node: {\b Directory listing}, \keepn Next: {\uldb Basic operations}{\v Basic_operations}, Prev: {\uldb Date input formats}{\v Date_input_formats}, Up: {\uldb Top}{\v Top}\line
K{\footnote K Directory listing}
#{\footnote Directory_listing}
${\footnote \pard{}Directory listing}\par
\pard{\fs24\b Directory listing}\par
\par
\pard{}This chapter describes the {\f1{}ls} command and its variants {\f1{}dir} and {\f1{}vdir}, which list information about files.\par
\par
{\par
\pard\keep\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880{}{\uldb ls invocation}{\v ls_invocation}\tab List directory contents.\par
{\uldb dir invocation}{\v dir_invocation}\tab Briefly ls.\par
{\uldb vdir invocation}{\v vdir_invocation}\tab Verbosely ls.\par
{\uldb dircolors invocation}{\v dircolors_invocation}\tab Color setup for ls, etc.\par
\pard{}}\par
\page\pard Node: {\b ls invocation}, \keepn Next: {\uldb dir invocation}{\v dir_invocation}, Prev: {\uldb }{\v }, Up: {\uldb Directory listing}{\v Directory_listing}\line
K{\footnote K ls invocation}
#{\footnote ls_invocation}
${\footnote {\f1{}\pard{}ls}: List directory contents}\par
\pard{\fs24\b {\f1{}ls}: List directory contents}\par
\par
\pard{}{K{\footnote K ls}}{K{\footnote K directory listing}} The {\f1{}ls} program lists information about files (of any type, including directories).  Options and file arguments can be intermixed arbitrarily, as usual.\par
\par
\pard{}For non-option command-line arguments that are directories, by default {\f1{}ls} lists the contents of directories, not recursively, and omitting files with names beginning with {\f1{}.}.  For other non-option arguments, by default {\f1{}ls} lists just the file name.  If no non-option arguments are specified, {\f1{}ls} lists the contents of the current directory.\par
\par
\pard{}By default, the output is sorted alphabetically.  If standard output is a terminal, the output is in columns (sorted vertically); otherwise, they are listed one per line.\par
\par
\pard{}Because {\f1{}ls} is such a fundamental program, it has accumulated many options over the years.  They are described in the subsections below; within each section, options are listed alphabetically (ignoring case).  The division of options into the subsections is not absolute, since some options affect more than one aspect of {\f1{}ls}'s operation.\par
\par
\pard{}{K{\footnote K -g (ignored)}}The {\f1{}-g} option is accepted but ignored, for compatibility with Unix.  Also see {\uldb Common options}{\v Common_options}.\par
\par
{\par
\pard\keep\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880{}{\uldb Which files are listed}{\v Which_files_are_listed}\tab \par
{\uldb What information is listed}{\v What_information_is_listed}\tab \par
{\uldb Sorting the output}{\v Sorting_the_output}\tab \par
{\uldb General output formatting}{\v General_output_formatting}\tab \par
{\uldb Formatting the file names}{\v Formatting_the_file_names}\tab\par
\pard{}}\par
\page\pard Node: {\b Which files are listed}, \keepn Next: {\uldb What information is listed}{\v What_information_is_listed}, Prev: {\uldb }{\v }, Up: {\uldb ls invocation}{\v ls_invocation}\line
K{\footnote K Which files are listed}
#{\footnote Which_files_are_listed}
${\footnote \pard{}Which files are listed}\par
\pard{\fs24\b Which files are listed}\par
\par
\pard{}These options determine which files {\f1{}ls} lists information for.  By default, any files and the contents of any directories on the command line are shown.\par
\par
{\pard{}{\f1{}-a}\par
\pard{}{\f1{}--all}\par
\pard\li720{}{K{\footnote K -a}}{K{\footnote K -all}}List all files in directories, including files that start with {\f1{}.}.\par
\par
\pard{}{\f1{}-A}\par
\pard{}{\f1{}--almost-all}\par
\pard\li720{}{K{\footnote K -A}}{K{\footnote K -almost-all}}List all files in directories except for {\f1{}.} and {\f1{}..}.\par
\par
\pard{}{\f1{}-B}\par
\pard{}{\f1{}--ignore-backups}\par
\pard\li720{}{K{\footnote K -B}}{K{\footnote K -ignore-backups}}{K{\footnote K backup files, ignoring}}Do not list files that end with {\f1{}~}, unless they are given on the command line.\par
\par
\pard{}{\f1{}-d}\par
\pard{}{\f1{}--directory}\par
\pard\li720{}{K{\footnote K -d}}{K{\footnote K -directory}}List just the names of directories, as with other types of files, rather than listing their contents.\par
\par
\pard{}{\f1{}-I}\par
\pard{}{\f1{}--ignore}\par
\pard\li720{}{K{\footnote K -I}}{K{\footnote K -ignore={\i pattern}}}Do not list files whose names match the shell pattern (not regular expression) {\i pattern} unless they are given on the command line.  As in the shell, an initial {\f1{}.} in a file name does not match a wildcard at the start of {\i pattern}.\par
\par
\pard{}{\f1{}-L}\par
\pard{}{\f1{}--dereference}\par
\pard\li720{}{K{\footnote K -L}}{K{\footnote K -dereference}}{K{\footnote K symbolic links, dereferencing}}In a long listing, show file information (e.g., times and permissions) for the referents of symbolic links rather than for the symbolic links themselves.\par
\par
\pard{}{\f1{}-R}\par
\pard{}{\f1{}--recursive}\par
\pard\li720{}{K{\footnote K -R}}{K{\footnote K -recursive}}{K{\footnote K recursive directory listing}}{K{\footnote K directory listing, recursive}}List the contents of all directories recursively.\par
\par
\pard{}}\par
\page\pard Node: {\b What information is listed}, \keepn Next: {\uldb Sorting the output}{\v Sorting_the_output}, Prev: {\uldb Which files are listed}{\v Which_files_are_listed}, Up: {\uldb ls invocation}{\v ls_invocation}\line
K{\footnote K What information is listed}
#{\footnote What_information_is_listed}
${\footnote \pard{}What information is listed}\par
\pard{\fs24\b What information is listed}\par
\par
\pard{}These options affect the information that {\f1{}ls} displays.  By default, only file names are shown.\par
\par
{\pard{}{\f1{}-D}\par
\pard{}{\f1{}--dired}\par
\pard\li720{}{K{\footnote K -D}}{K{\footnote K -dired}}{K{\footnote K dired Emacs mode support}}With the long listing ({\f1{}-l}) format, print an additional line after the main output:\par
\par
{\pard\keep\li1440\f1{}//DIRED// {\i beg1 end1 beg2 end2 ...}\par
\pard\li720\f0{}}\par
\pard\li720{}The {\i begN} and {\i endN} are unsigned integers which record the byte position of the beginning and end of each file name in the output.  This makes it easy for Emacs to find the names, even when they contain unusual characters such as space or newline, without fancy searching.\par
\par
\pard\li720{}If directories are being listed recursively ({\f1{}-R}), output a similar line after each subdirectory: {\par
\pard\keep\li1440\f1{}//SUBDIRED// {\i beg1 end1 ...}\par
\pard\li720\f0{}}\par
\pard{}{\f1{}-G}\par
\pard{}{\f1{}--no-group}\par
\pard\li720{}{K{\footnote K -G}}{K{\footnote K -no-group}}Inhibit display of group information in a long format directory listing.  (This is the default in some non-GNU versions of {\f1{}ls}, so we provide this option for compatibility.)\par
\par
\pard{}{\f1{}-i}\par
\pard{}{\f1{}--inode}\par
\pard\li720{}{K{\footnote K -i}}{K{\footnote K -inode}}{K{\footnote K inode number, printing}}Print the inode number (also called the file serial number and index number) of each file to the left of the file name.  (This number uniquely identifies each file within a particular filesystem.)\par
\par
\pard{}{\f1{}-l}\par
\pard{}{\f1{}--format=long}\par
\pard{}{\f1{}--format=verbose}\par
\pard\li720{}{K{\footnote K -l}}{K{\footnote K -format}}{K{\footnote K long ls format}}{K{\footnote K verbose ls format}}In addition to the name of each file, print the file type, permissions, number of hard links, owner name, group name, size in bytes, and timestamp (by default, the modification time).  For files with a time more than six months old or more than one hour into the future, the timestamp contains the year instead of the time of day.\par
\par
\pard\li720{}For each directory that is listed, preface the files with a line {\f1{}total {\i blocks}}, where {\i blocks} is the total disk space used by all files in that directory.  By default, 1024-byte blocks are used; if the environment variable {\f1{}POSIXLY_CORRECT} is set, 512-byte blocks are used (unless the {\f1{}-k} option is given).  The {\i blocks} computed counts each hard link separately; this is arguably a deficiency.\par
\par
\pard\li720{}{K{\footnote K permissions, output by {\f1{}ls}}}The permissions listed are similar to symbolic mode specifications (see {\uldb Symbolic Modes}{\v Symbolic_Modes}).  But {\f1{}ls} combines multiple bits into the third character of each set of permissions as follows: {\par
\pard\li720{}{\f1{}s}\par
\pard\li1440{}If the setuid or setgid bit and the corresponding executable bit are both set.\par
\par
\pard\li720{}{\f1{}S}\par
\pard\li1440{}If the setuid or setgid bit is set but the corresponding executable bit is not set.\par
\par
\pard\li720{}{\f1{}t}\par
\pard\li1440{}If the sticky bit and the other-executable bit are both set.\par
\par
\pard\li720{}{\f1{}T}\par
\pard\li1440{}If the sticky bit is set but the other-executable bit is not set.\par
\par
\pard\li720{}{\f1{}x}\par
\pard\li1440{}If the executable bit is set and none of the above apply.\par
\par
\pard\li720{}{\f1{}-}\par
\pard\li1440{}Otherwise.\par
\pard\li720{}}\par
\pard{}{\f1{}-o}\par
\pard\li720{}{K{\footnote K -o}}Produce long format directory listings, but don't display group information.  It is equivalent to using {\f1{}--format=long} with {\f1{}--no-group} .  This option is provided for compatibility with other versions of {\f1{}ls}.\par
\par
\pard{}{\f1{}-s}\par
\pard{}{\f1{}--size}\par
\pard\li720{}{K{\footnote K -s}}{K{\footnote K -size}}{K{\footnote K size of files, reporting}}{K{\footnote K POSIXLY_CORRECT, overrides {\f1{}ls -s}}}Print the size of each file in 1024-byte blocks to the left of the file name.  If the environment variable {\f1{}POSIXLY_CORRECT} is set, 512-byte blocks are used instead, unless the {\f1{}-k} option is given (see {\uldb General output formatting}{\v General_output_formatting}).\par
\par
\pard\li720{}{K{\footnote K NFS mounts from BSD to HP-UX}}For files that are NFS-mounted from an HP-UX system to a BSD system, this option reports sizes that are half the correct values.  On HP-UX systems, it reports sizes that are twice the correct values for files that are NFS-mounted from BSD systems.  This is due to a flaw in HP-UX; it also affects the HP-UX {\f1{}ls} program.\par
\par
\pard{}}\par
\page\pard Node: {\b Sorting the output}, \keepn Next: {\uldb General output formatting}{\v General_output_formatting}, Prev: {\uldb What information is listed}{\v What_information_is_listed}, Up: {\uldb ls invocation}{\v ls_invocation}\line
K{\footnote K Sorting the output}
#{\footnote Sorting_the_output}
${\footnote \pard{}Sorting the output}\par
\pard{\fs24\b Sorting the output}\par
\par
\pard{}{K{\footnote K sorting {\f1{}ls} output}}These options change the order in which {\f1{}ls} sorts the information it outputs.  By default, sorting is done by character code (e.g., ASCII order).\par
\par
{\pard{}{\f1{}-c}\par
\pard{}{\f1{}--time=ctime}\par
\pard{}{\f1{}--time=status}\par
\pard\li720{}{K{\footnote K -c}}{K{\footnote K -time}}{K{\footnote K ctime, sorting by}}{K{\footnote K status time, sorting by}}Sort according to the status change time (the {\f1{}ctime} in the inode).  If the long listing format ({\f1{}-l}) is being used, print the status change time instead of the modification time.\par
\par
\pard{}{\f1{}-f}\par
\pard\li720{}{K{\footnote K -f}}{K{\footnote K unsorted directory listing}}{K{\footnote K directory order, listing by}}Primarily, like {\f1{}-U}--do not sort; list the files in whatever order they are stored in the directory.  But also enable {\f1{}-a} (list all files) and disable {\f1{}-l}, {\f1{}--color}, and {\f1{}-s} (if they were specified before the {\f1{}-f}).\par
\par
\pard{}{\f1{}-r}\par
\pard{}{\f1{}--reverse}\par
\pard\li720{}{K{\footnote K -r}}{K{\footnote K -reverse}}{K{\footnote K reverse sorting}}Reverse whatever the sorting method is--e.g., list files in reverse alphabetical order, youngest first, smallest first, or whatever.\par
\par
\pard{}{\f1{}-S}\par
\pard{}{\f1{}--sort=size}\par
\pard\li720{}{K{\footnote K -S}}{K{\footnote K -sort}}{K{\footnote K size of files, sorting files by}}Sort by file size, largest first.\par
\par
\pard{}{\f1{}-t}\par
\pard{}{\f1{}--sort=time}\par
\pard\li720{}{K{\footnote K -t}}{K{\footnote K -sort}}{K{\footnote K modification time, sorting files by}}Sort by modification time (the {\f1{}mtime} in the inode), newest first.\par
\par
\pard{}{\f1{}-u}\par
\pard{}{\f1{}--time=atime}\par
\pard{}{\f1{}--time=access}\par
\pard{}{\f1{}--time=use}\par
\pard\li720{}{K{\footnote K -u}}{K{\footnote K -time}}{K{\footnote K atime, sorting files by}}{K{\footnote K access time, sorting files by}}{K{\footnote K use time, sorting files by}}Sort by access time (the {\f1{}atime} in the inode).  If the long listing format is being used, print the last access time.\par
\par
\pard{}{\f1{}-U}\par
\pard{}{\f1{}--sort=none}\par
\pard\li720{}{K{\footnote K -U}}{K{\footnote K -sort}}{K{\footnote K none, sorting option for {\f1{}ls}}}Do not sort; list the files in whatever order they are stored in the directory.  (Do not do any of the other unrelated things that {\f1{}-f} does.)  This is especially useful when listing very large directories, since not doing any sorting can be noticeably faster.\par
\par
\pard{}{\f1{}-X}\par
\pard{}{\f1{}--sort=extension}\par
\pard\li720{}{K{\footnote K -X}}{K{\footnote K -sort}}{K{\footnote K extension, sorting files by}}Sort directory contents alphabetically by file extension (characters after the last {\f1{}.}); files with no extension are sorted first.\par
\par
\pard{}}\par
\page\pard Node: {\b General output formatting}, \keepn Next: {\uldb Formatting the file names}{\v Formatting_the_file_names}, Prev: {\uldb Sorting the output}{\v Sorting_the_output}, Up: {\uldb ls invocation}{\v ls_invocation}\line
K{\footnote K General output formatting}
#{\footnote General_output_formatting}
${\footnote \pard{}General output formatting}\par
\pard{\fs24\b General output formatting}\par
\par
\pard{}These options affect the appearance of the overall output.\par
\par
{\pard{}{\f1{}-1}\par
\pard{}{\f1{}--format=single-column}\par
\pard\li720{}{K{\footnote K -1}}{K{\footnote K -format}}{K{\footnote K single-column output of files}}List one file per line.  This is the default for {\f1{}ls} when standard output is not a terminal.\par
\par
\pard{}{\f1{}-C}\par
\pard{}{\f1{}--format=vertical}\par
\pard\li720{}{K{\footnote K -C}}{K{\footnote K -format}}{K{\footnote K vertical sorted files in columns}}List files in columns, sorted vertically.  This is the default for {\f1{}ls} if standard output is a terminal.  It is always the default for the {\f1{}dir} and {\f1{}d} programs.\par
\par
\pard{}{\f1{}--color [={\i when}]}\par
\pard\li720{}{K{\footnote K -color}}{K{\footnote K color, distinguishing file types with}}Specify whether to use color for distinguishing file types.  {\i when} may be omitted, or one of: {\par
\pard\fi-720\li1440\tx864\tx1440{}\tab{}{\f2\'B7}\tab{}none {K{\footnote K none color option}}Do not use color at all.  This is the default.\par
\par
\pard\fi-720\li1440\tx864\tx1440{}\tab{}{\f2\'B7}\tab{}auto {K{\footnote K auto color option}}{K{\footnote K terminal, using color iff}}Only use color if standard output is a terminal.\par
\par
\pard\fi-720\li1440\tx864\tx1440{}\tab{}{\f2\'B7}\tab{}always {K{\footnote K always color option}}Always use color.\par
\pard\li720{}}Specifying {\f1{}--color} and no {\i when} is equivalent to {\f1{}--color=always}.\par
\par
\pard{}{\f1{}-F}\par
\pard{}{\f1{}--classify}\par
\pard\li720{}{K{\footnote K -F}}{K{\footnote K -classify}}{K{\footnote K file type and executables, marking}}{K{\footnote K executables and file type, marking}}Append a character to each file name indicating the file type.  Also, for regular files that are executable, append {\f1{}*}.  The file type indicators are {\f1{}/} for directories, {\f1{}@} for symbolic links, {\f1{}|} for FIFOs, {\f1{}=} for sockets, and nothing for regular files.\par
\par
\pard{}{\f1{}--full-time}\par
\pard\li720{}{K{\footnote K -full-time}}List times in full, rather than using the standard abbreviation heuristics.  The format is the same as {\f1{}date}'s default; it's not possible to change this, but you can extract out the date string with {\f1{}cut} and then pass the result to {\f1{}date -d}.  See {\uldb {\f1{}date} invocation}{\v date_line_invocation @sh-utils.hlp}.\par
\par
\pard\li720{}This is most useful because the time output includes the seconds.  (Unix filesystems store file timestamps only to the nearest second, so this option shows all the information there is.)  For example, this can help when you have a Makefile that is not regenerating files properly.\par
\par
\pard{}{\f1{}-k}\par
\pard{}{\f1{}--kilobytes}\par
\pard\li720{}{K{\footnote K -k}}{K{\footnote K -kilobytes}}{K{\footnote K POSIXLY_CORRECT, overridden by {\f1{}ls -k}}}If file sizes are being listed, print them in kilobytes.  This overrides the environment variable {\f1{}POSIXLY_CORRECT}.\par
\par
\pard{}{\f1{}-m}\par
\pard{}{\f1{}--format=commas}\par
\pard\li720{}{K{\footnote K -m}}{K{\footnote K -format}}{K{\footnote K commas, outputting between files}}List files horizontally, with as many as will fit on each line, separated by {\f1{}, } (a comma and a space).\par
\par
\pard{}{\f1{}-n}\par
\pard{}{\f1{}--numeric-uid-gid}\par
\pard\li720{}{K{\footnote K -n}}{K{\footnote K -numeric-uid-gid}}{K{\footnote K numeric uid and gid}}List the numeric UID and GID instead of the names.\par
\par
\pard{}{\f1{}-p}\par
\pard\li720{}{K{\footnote K file type, marking}}Append a character to each file name indicating the file type. This is like {\f1{}-F}, except that executables are not marked.\par
\par
\pard{}{\f1{}-x {\i format}}\par
\pard{}{\f1{}--format=across}\par
\pard{}{\f1{}--format=horizontal}\par
\pard\li720{}{K{\footnote K -x}}{K{\footnote K -format}}{K{\footnote K across, listing files}}{K{\footnote K horizontal, listing files}}List the files in columns, sorted horizontally.\par
\par
\pard{}{\f1{}-T {\i cols}}\par
\pard{}{\f1{}--tabsize={\i cols}}\par
\pard\li720{}{K{\footnote K -T}}{K{\footnote K -tabsize}}Assume that each tabstop is {\i cols} columns wide.  The default is 8.  {\f1{}ls} uses tabs where possible in the output, for efficiency.  If {\i cols} is zero, do not use tabs at all.\par
\par
\pard{}{\f1{}-w}\par
\pard{}{\f1{}--width={\i cols}}\par
\pard\li720{}{K{\footnote K -w}}{K{\footnote K -width}}{K{\footnote K COLUMNS}}Assume the screen is {\i cols} columns wide.  The default is taken from the terminal settings if possible; otherwise the environment variable {\f1{}COLUMNS} is used if it is set; otherwise the default is 80.\par
\par
\pard{}}\par
\page\pard Node: {\b Formatting the file names}, \keepn Next: {\uldb }{\v }, Prev: {\uldb General output formatting}{\v General_output_formatting}, Up: {\uldb ls invocation}{\v ls_invocation}\line
K{\footnote K Formatting the file names}
#{\footnote Formatting_the_file_names}
${\footnote \pard{}Formatting the file names}\par
\pard{\fs24\b Formatting the file names}\par
\par
\pard{}These options change how file names themselves are printed.\par
\par
{\pard{}{\f1{}-b}\par
\pard{}{\f1{}--escape}\par
\pard\li720{}{K{\footnote K -b}}{K{\footnote K -escape}}{K{\footnote K backslash sequences for file names}}Quote nongraphic characters in file names using alphabetic and octal backslash sequences like those used in C.\par
\par
\pard{}{\f1{}-N}\par
\pard{}{\f1{}--literal}\par
\pard\li720{}{K{\footnote K -N}}{K{\footnote K -literal}}Do not quote file names.\par
\par
\pard{}{\f1{}-q}\par
\pard{}{\f1{}--hide-control-chars}\par
\pard\li720{}{K{\footnote K -q}}{K{\footnote K -hide-control-chars}}Print question marks instead of nongraphic characters in file names.  This is the default.\par
\par
\pard{}{\f1{}-Q}\par
\pard{}{\f1{}--quote-name}\par
\pard\li720{}{K{\footnote K -Q}}{K{\footnote K -quote-name}}Enclose file names in double quotes and quote nongraphic characters as in C.\par
\par
\pard{}}\par
\page\pard Node: {\b dir invocation}, \keepn Next: {\uldb vdir invocation}{\v vdir_invocation}, Prev: {\uldb ls invocation}{\v ls_invocation}, Up: {\uldb Directory listing}{\v Directory_listing}\line
K{\footnote K dir invocation}
#{\footnote dir_invocation}
${\footnote {\f1{}\pard{}dir}: Briefly list directory contents}\par
\pard{\fs24\b {\f1{}dir}: Briefly list directory contents}\par
\par
\pard{}{K{\footnote K dir}}{K{\footnote K directory listing, brief}} {\f1{}dir} (also installed as {\f1{}d}) is equivalent to {\f1{}ls -C}; that is, files are by default listed in columns, sorted vertically.\par
\par
\pard{}See {\uldb {\f1{}ls}}{\v ls_invocation}.\par
\par
\page\pard Node: {\b vdir invocation}, \keepn Next: {\uldb dircolors invocation}{\v dircolors_invocation}, Prev: {\uldb dir invocation}{\v dir_invocation}, Up: {\uldb Directory listing}{\v Directory_listing}\line
K{\footnote K vdir invocation}
#{\footnote vdir_invocation}
${\footnote {\f1{}\pard{}vdir}: Verbosely list directory contents}\par
\pard{\fs24\b {\f1{}vdir}: Verbosely list directory contents}\par
\par
\pard{}{K{\footnote K vdir}}{K{\footnote K directory listing, verbose}} {\f1{}vdir} (also installed as {\f1{}v})is equivalent to {\f1{}ls -l}; that is, files are by default listed in long format.\par
\par
\page\pard Node: {\b dircolors invocation}, \keepn Next: {\uldb }{\v }, Prev: {\uldb vdir invocation}{\v vdir_invocation}, Up: {\uldb Directory listing}{\v Directory_listing}\line
K{\footnote K dircolors invocation}
#{\footnote dircolors_invocation}
${\footnote {\f1{}\pard{}dircolors}: Color setup for {\f1{}ls}}\par
\pard{\fs24\b {\f1{}dircolors}: Color setup for {\f1{}ls}}\par
\par
\pard{}{K{\footnote K dircolors}}{K{\footnote K color setup}}{K{\footnote K setup for color}} {\f1{}dircolors} outputs a sequence of shell commands to set up the terminal for color output from {\f1{}ls} (and {\f1{}dir}, etc.).  Typical usage:\par
\par
{\pard\keep\li720\f1{}eval `dircolors [{\i option}]... [{\i file}]`\par
\pard\f0{}}\par
\pard{}If {\i file} is specified, {\f1{}dircolors} reads it to determine which colors to use for which file types and extensions.  Otherwise, a precompiled database is used.  For details on the format of these files, run {\f1{}dircolors --print-database}.\par
\par
\pard{}{K{\footnote K LS_COLORS}}{K{\footnote K SHELL environment variable, and color}}The output is a shell command to set the {\f1{}LS_COLORS} environment variable.  You can specify the shell syntax to use on the command line, or {\f1{}dircolors} will guess it from the value of the {\f1{}SHELL} environment variable.\par
\par
\pard{}The program accepts the following options.  Also see {\uldb Common options}{\v Common_options}.\par
\par
{\pard{}{\f1{}-b}\par
\pard{}{\f1{}--sh}\par
\pard{}{\f1{}--bourne-shell}\par
\pard\li720{}{K{\footnote K -b}}{K{\footnote K -sh}}{K{\footnote K -bourne-shell}}{K{\footnote K Bourne shell syntax for color setup}}{K{\footnote K {\f1{}sh} syntax for color setup}}Output Bourne shell commands.  This is the default if the {\f1{}SHELL} environment variable is set and does not end with {\f1{}csh} or {\f1{}tcsh}.\par
\par
\pard{}{\f1{}-c}\par
\pard{}{\f1{}--csh}\par
\pard{}{\f1{}--c-shell}\par
\pard\li720{}{K{\footnote K -c}}{K{\footnote K -csh}}{K{\footnote K -c-shell}}{K{\footnote K C shell syntax for color setup}}{K{\footnote K {\f1{}csh} syntax for color setup}}Output C shell commands.  This is the default if {\f1{}SHELL} ends with {\f1{}csh} or {\f1{}tcsh}.\par
\par
\pard{}{\f1{}-p}\par
\pard{}{\f1{}--print-database}\par
\pard\li720{}{K{\footnote K -p}}{K{\footnote K -print-database}}{K{\footnote K color database, printing}}{K{\footnote K database for color setup, printing}}{K{\footnote K printing color database}}Print the (compiled-in) default color configuration database.  This output is itself a valid configuration file, and is fairly descriptive of the possibilities.\par
\par
\pard{}}\par
\page\pard Node: {\b Basic operations}, \keepn Next: {\uldb Special file types}{\v Special_file_types}, Prev: {\uldb Directory listing}{\v Directory_listing}, Up: {\uldb Top}{\v Top}\line
K{\footnote K Basic operations}
#{\footnote Basic_operations}
${\footnote \pard{}Basic operations}\par
\pard{\fs24\b Basic operations}\par
\par
\pard{}{K{\footnote K manipulating files}} This chapter describes the commands for basic file manipulation: copying, moving (renaming), and deleting (removing).\par
\par
{\par
\pard\keep\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880{}{\uldb cp invocation}{\v cp_invocation}\tab Copy files.\par
{\uldb dd invocation}{\v dd_invocation}\tab Convert and copy a file.\par
{\uldb install invocation}{\v install_invocation}\tab Copy files and set attributes.\par
{\uldb mv invocation}{\v mv_invocation}\tab Move (rename) files.\par
{\uldb rm invocation}{\v rm_invocation}\tab Remove files or directories.\par
\pard{}}\par
\page\pard Node: {\b cp invocation}, \keepn Next: {\uldb dd invocation}{\v dd_invocation}, Prev: {\uldb }{\v }, Up: {\uldb Basic operations}{\v Basic_operations}\line
K{\footnote K cp invocation}
#{\footnote cp_invocation}
${\footnote {\f1{}\pard{}cp}: Copy files and directories}\par
\pard{\fs24\b {\f1{}cp}: Copy files and directories}\par
\par
\pard{}{K{\footnote K cp}}{K{\footnote K copying files and directories}}{K{\footnote K files, copying}}{K{\footnote K directories, copying}} {\f1{}cp} copies files (or, optionally, directories).  The copy is completely independent of the original.  You can either copy one file to another, or copy arbitrarily many files to a destination directory.  Synopsis:\par
\par
{\pard\keep\li720\f1{}cp [{\i option}]... {\i source} {\i dest}\line
cp [{\i option}]... {\i source}... {\i directory}\par
\pard\f0{}}\par
\pard{}If the last argument names an existing directory, {\f1{}cp} copies each {\i source} file into that directory (retaining the same name).  Otherwise, if only two files are given, it copies the first onto the second.  It is an error if the last argument is not a directory and more than two non-option arguments are given.\par
\par
\pard{}Generally, files are written just as they are read.  For exceptions, see the {\f1{}--sparse} option below.\par
\par
\pard{}By default, {\f1{}cp} does not copy directories (see {\f1{}-r} below).\par
\par
\pard{}{K{\footnote K self-backups}}{K{\footnote K backups, making only}}{\f1{}cp} generally refuses to copy a file onto itself, with the following exception: if {\f1{}--force --backup} is specified with {\i source} and {\i dest} identical, and referring to a regular file, {\f1{}cp} will make a backup file, either regular or numbered, as specified in the usual ways (see {\uldb Backup options}{\v Backup_options}).  This is useful when you simply want to make a backup of an existing file before changing it.\par
\par
\pard{}The program accepts the following options.  Also see {\uldb Common options}{\v Common_options}.\par
\par
{\pard{}{\f1{}-a}\par
\pard{}{\f1{}--archive}\par
\pard\li720{}{K{\footnote K -a}}{K{\footnote K -archive}}Preserve as much as possible of the structure and attributes of the original files in the copy (but do not preserve directory structure).  Equivalent to {\f1{}-dpR}.\par
\par
\pard{}{\f1{}-b}\par
\pard{}{\f1{}--backup}\par
\pard\li720{}{K{\footnote K -b}}{K{\footnote K -backup}}{K{\footnote K backups, making}}Make backups of files that are about to be overwritten or removed.  See {\uldb Backup options}{\v Backup_options}.\par
\par
\pard{}{\f1{}-d}\par
\pard{}{\f1{}--no-dereference}\par
\pard\li720{}{K{\footnote K -d}}{K{\footnote K -no-dereference}}{K{\footnote K symbolic links, copying}}{K{\footnote K hard links, preserving}}Copy symbolic links as symbolic links rather than copying the files that they point to, and preserve hard links between source files in the copies.\par
\par
\pard{}{\f1{}-f}\par
\pard{}{\f1{}--force}\par
\pard\li720{}{K{\footnote K -f}}{K{\footnote K -force}}Remove existing destination files.\par
\par
\pard{}{\f1{}-i}\par
\pard{}{\f1{}--interactive}\par
\pard\li720{}{K{\footnote K -i}}{K{\footnote K -interactive}}Prompt whether to overwrite existing regular destination files.\par
\par
\pard{}{\f1{}-l}\par
\pard{}{\f1{}--link}\par
\pard\li720{}{K{\footnote K -l}}{K{\footnote K -link}}Make hard links instead of copies of non-directories.\par
\par
\pard{}{\f1{}-p}\par
\pard{}{\f1{}--preserve}\par
\pard\li720{}{K{\footnote K -p}}{K{\footnote K -preserve}}{K{\footnote K file information, preserving}}Preserve the original files' owner, group, permissions, and timestamps.\par
\par
\pard{}{\f1{}-P}\par
\pard{}{\f1{}--parents}\par
\pard\li720{}{K{\footnote K -P}}{K{\footnote K -parents}}{K{\footnote K parent directories and {\f1{}cp}}}Form the name of each destination file by appending to the target directory a slash and the specified name of the source file.  The last argument given to {\f1{}cp} must be the name of an existing directory.  For example, the command:\par
\par
{\pard\keep\li1440\f1{}cp --parents a/b/c existing_dir\par
\pard\li720\f0{}}\par
\pard\li720{}copies the file {\f1{}a/b/c} to {\f1{}existing_dir/a/b/c}, creating any missing intermediate directories.\par
\par
\pard{}{\f1{}-r}\par
\pard\li720{}{K{\footnote K directories, copying recursively}}{K{\footnote K copying directories recursively}}{K{\footnote K recursively copying directories}}{K{\footnote K non-directories, copying as special files}}Copy directories recursively, copying any non-directories and non-symbolic links (that is, FIFOs and special files) as if they were regular files.  This means trying to read the data in each source file and writing it to the destination.  Thus, with this option, {\f1{}cp} may well hang indefinitely reading a FIFO, unless something else happens to be writing it.\par
\par
\pard{}{\f1{}-R}\par
\pard{}{\f1{}--recursive}\par
\pard\li720{}{K{\footnote K -R}}{K{\footnote K -recursive}}Copy directories recursively, preserving non-directories (see {\f1{}-r} just above).\par
\par
\pard{}{\f1{}--sparse={\i when}}\par
\pard\li720{}{K{\footnote K -sparse={\i when}}}{K{\footnote K sparse files, copying}}{K{\footnote K holes, copying files with}}{K{\footnote K read system call, and holes}}A \'A2sparse file\'A2 contains \'A2holes\'A2--a sequence of zero bytes that does not occupy any physical disk blocks; the {\f1{}read} system call reads these as zeroes.  This can both save considerable disk space and increase speed, since many binary files contain lots of consecutive zero bytes.  By default, {\f1{}cp} detects holes in input source files via a crude heuristic and makes the corresponding output file sparse as well.\par
\par
\pard\li720{}The {\i when} value can be one of the following: {\par
\pard\li720{}{\f1{}auto}\par
\pard\li1440{}The default behavior: the output file is sparse if the input file is sparse.\par
\par
\pard\li720{}{\f1{}always}\par
\pard\li1440{}Always make the output file sparse.  This is useful when the input file resides on a filesystem that does not support sparse files (the most notable example is {\f1{}efs} filesystems in SGI IRIX 5.3 and earlier), but the output file is on another type of filesystem.\par
\par
\pard\li720{}{\f1{}never}\par
\pard\li1440{}Never make the output file sparse.  If you find an application for this option, let us know.\par
\pard\li720{}}\par
\pard{}{\f1{}-s}\par
\pard{}{\f1{}--symbolic-link}\par
\pard\li720{}{K{\footnote K -s}}{K{\footnote K -symbolic-link}}{K{\footnote K symbolic links, copying with}}Make symbolic links instead of copies of non-directories.  All source file names must be absolute (starting with {\f1{}/}) unless the destination files are in the current directory.  This option merely results in an error message on systems that do not support symbolic links.\par
\par
\pard{}{\f1{}-S {\i suffix}}\par
\pard{}{\f1{}--suffix={\i suffix}}\par
\pard\li720{}{K{\footnote K -S}}{K{\footnote K -suffix}}Append {\i suffix} to each backup file made with {\f1{}-b}.  See {\uldb Backup options}{\v Backup_options}.\par
\par
\pard{}{\f1{}-u}\par
\pard{}{\f1{}--update}\par
\pard\li720{}{K{\footnote K -u}}{K{\footnote K -update}}{K{\footnote K newer files, copying only}}Do not copy a nondirectory that has an existing destination with the same or newer modification time.\par
\par
\pard{}{\f1{}-v}\par
\pard{}{\f1{}--verbose}\par
\pard\li720{}{K{\footnote K -v}}{K{\footnote K -verbose}}Print the name of each file before copying it.\par
\par
\pard{}{\f1{}-V {\i method}}\par
\pard{}{\f1{}--version-control={\i method}}\par
\pard\li720{}{K{\footnote K -V}}{K{\footnote K -version-control}}Change the type of backups made with {\f1{}-b}.  The {\i method} argument can be {\f1{}numbered} (or {\f1{}t}), {\f1{}existing} (or {\f1{}nil}), or {\f1{}never} (or {\f1{}simple}).  See {\uldb Backup options}{\v Backup_options}.\par
\par
\pard{}{\f1{}-x}\par
\pard{}{\f1{}--one-file-system}\par
\pard\li720{}{K{\footnote K -x}}{K{\footnote K -one-file-system}}{K{\footnote K filesystems, omitting copying to different}}Skip subdirectories that are on different filesystems from the one that the copy started on.\par
\par
\pard{}}\par
\page\pard Node: {\b dd invocation}, \keepn Next: {\uldb install invocation}{\v install_invocation}, Prev: {\uldb cp invocation}{\v cp_invocation}, Up: {\uldb Basic operations}{\v Basic_operations}\line
K{\footnote K dd invocation}
#{\footnote dd_invocation}
${\footnote {\f1{}\pard{}dd}: Convert and copy a file}\par
\pard{\fs24\b {\f1{}dd}: Convert and copy a file}\par
\par
\pard{}{K{\footnote K dd}}{K{\footnote K converting while copying a file}} {\f1{}dd} copies a file (from standard input to standard output, by default) with a changeable I/O blocksize, while optionally performing conversions on it.  Synopsis:\par
\par
{\pard\keep\li720\f1{}dd [{\i option}]...\par
\pard\f0{}}\par
\pard{}The program accepts the following options.  Also see {\uldb Common options}{\v Common_options}.\par
\par
\pard{}{K{\footnote K multipliers after numbers}}The numeric-valued options below ({\i bytes} and {\i blocks}) can be followed by a multiplier: {\f1{}b}=512, {\f1{}c}=1, {\f1{}k}=1024, {\f1{}w}=2, {\f1{}x{\i m}}={\i m}.\par
\par
{\pard{}{\f1{}if={\i file}}\par
\pard\li720{}{K{\footnote K if}}Read from {\i file} instead of standard input.\par
\par
\pard{}{\f1{}of={\i file}}\par
\pard\li720{}{K{\footnote K of}}Write to {\i file} instead of standard output.  Unless {\f1{}conv=notrunc} is given, {\f1{}dd} truncates {\i file} to zero bytes (or the size specified with {\f1{}seek=}).\par
\par
\pard{}{\f1{}ibs={\i bytes}}\par
\pard\li720{}{K{\footnote K ibs}}{K{\footnote K block size of input}}{K{\footnote K input block size}}Read {\i bytes} bytes at a time.\par
\par
\pard{}{\f1{}obs={\i bytes}}\par
\pard\li720{}{K{\footnote K obs}}{K{\footnote K block size of output}}{K{\footnote K output block size}}Write {\i bytes} bytes at a time.\par
\par
\pard{}{\f1{}bs={\i bytes}}\par
\pard\li720{}{K{\footnote K bs}}{K{\footnote K block size}}Both read and write {\i bytes} bytes at a time.  This overrides {\f1{}ibs} and {\f1{}obs}.\par
\par
\pard{}{\f1{}cbs={\i bytes}}\par
\pard\li720{}{K{\footnote K cbs}}{K{\footnote K block size of conversion}}{K{\footnote K converstion block size}}Convert {\i bytes} bytes at a time.\par
\par
\pard{}{\f1{}skip={\i blocks}}\par
\pard\li720{}{K{\footnote K skip}}Skip {\i blocks} {\f1{}ibs}-byte blocks in the input file before copying.\par
\par
\pard{}{\f1{}seek={\i blocks}}\par
\pard\li720{}{K{\footnote K seek}}Skip {\i blocks} {\f1{}obs}-byte blocks in the output file before copying.\par
\par
\pard{}{\f1{}count={\i blocks}}\par
\pard\li720{}{K{\footnote K count}}Copy {\i blocks} {\f1{}obs}-byte blocks from the input file, instead of everything until the end of the file.\par
\par
\pard{}{\f1{}conv={\i conversion}[,{\i conversion}]...}\par
\pard\li720{}{K{\footnote K conv}}Convert the file as specified by the {\i conversion} argument(s).  (No spaces around any comma(s).)\par
\par
\pard\li720{}Conversions:\par
\par
{\pard\li720{}{\f1{}ascii}\par
\pard\li1440{}{K{\footnote K ascii, converting to}}Convert EBCDIC to ASCII.\par
\par
\pard\li720{}{\f1{}ebcdic}\par
\pard\li1440{}{K{\footnote K ebcdic, converting to}}Convert ASCII to EBCDIC.\par
\par
\pard\li720{}{\f1{}ibm}\par
\pard\li1440{}{K{\footnote K alternate ebcdic, converting to}}Convert ASCII to alternate EBCDIC.\par
\par
\pard\li720{}{\f1{}block}\par
\pard\li1440{}{K{\footnote K block (space-padding)}}For each line in the input, output {\f1{}cbs} bytes, replacing the input newline with a space and padding with spaces as necessary.\par
\par
\pard\li720{}{\f1{}unblock}\par
\pard\li1440{}{K{\footnote K unblock}}Replace trailing spaces in each {\f1{}cbs}-sized input block with a newline.\par
\par
\pard\li720{}{\f1{}lcase}\par
\pard\li1440{}{K{\footnote K lcase, converting to}}Change uppercase letters to lowercase.\par
\par
\pard\li720{}{\f1{}ucase}\par
\pard\li1440{}{K{\footnote K ucase, converting to}}Change lowercase letters to uppercase.\par
\par
\pard\li720{}{\f1{}swab}\par
\pard\li1440{}{K{\footnote K swab (byte-swapping)}}{K{\footnote K byte-swapping}}Swap every pair of input bytes.  GNU {\f1{}dd}, unlike others, works when an odd number of bytes are read--the last byte is simply copied (since there is nothing to swap it with).\par
\par
\pard\li720{}{\f1{}noerror}\par
\pard\li1440{}{K{\footnote K noerror}}{K{\footnote K read errors, ignoring}}Continue after read errors.\par
\par
\pard\li720{}{\f1{}notrunc}\par
\pard\li1440{}{K{\footnote K notrunc}}{K{\footnote K truncating output file, avoiding}}Do not truncate the output file.\par
\par
\pard\li720{}{\f1{}sync}\par
\pard\li1440{}{K{\footnote K sync (padding with nulls)}}Pad every input block to size of {\f1{}ibs} with trailing zero bytes.\par
\pard\li720{}}\par
\pard{}}\par
\page\pard Node: {\b install invocation}, \keepn Next: {\uldb mv invocation}{\v mv_invocation}, Prev: {\uldb dd invocation}{\v dd_invocation}, Up: {\uldb Basic operations}{\v Basic_operations}\line
K{\footnote K install invocation}
#{\footnote install_invocation}
${\footnote {\f1{}\pard{}install}: Copy files and set attributes}\par
\pard{\fs24\b {\f1{}install}: Copy files and set attributes}\par
\par
\pard{}{K{\footnote K install}}{K{\footnote K copying files and setting attributes}} {\f1{}install} copies files while setting their permission modes and, if possible, their owner and group.  Synopses:\par
\par
{\pard\keep\li720\f1{}install [{\i option}]... {\i source} {\i dest}\line
install [{\i option}]... {\i source}... {\i directory}\line
install -d [{\i option}]... {\i directory}...\par
\pard\f0{}}\par
\pard{}In the first of these, the {\i source} file is copied to the {\i dest} target file.  In the second, each of the {\i source} files are copied to the destination {\i directory}.  In the last, each {\i directory} (and any missing parent directories) is created.\par
\par
\pard{}{K{\footnote K Makefiles, installing programs in}}{\f1{}install} is similar to {\f1{}cp}, but allows you to control the attributes of destination files.  It is typically used in Makefiles to copy programs into their destination directories.  It refuses to copy files onto themselves.\par
\par
\pard{}The program accepts the following options.  Also see {\uldb Common options}{\v Common_options}.\par
\par
{\pard{}{\f1{}-b}\par
\pard{}{\f1{}--backup}\par
\pard\li720{}{K{\footnote K -b}}{K{\footnote K -backup}}{K{\footnote K backups, making}}Make backups of files that are about to be overwritten or removed.  See {\uldb Backup options}{\v Backup_options}.\par
\par
\pard{}{\f1{}-c}\par
\pard\li720{}{K{\footnote K -c}}Ignored; for compatibility with old Unix versions of {\f1{}install}.\par
\par
\pard{}{\f1{}-d}\par
\pard{}{\f1{}--directory}\par
\pard\li720{}{K{\footnote K -d}}{K{\footnote K -directory}}{K{\footnote K directories, creating with given attributes}}{K{\footnote K parent directories, creating missing}}{K{\footnote K leading directories, creating missing}}Create each given directory and any missing parent directories, setting the owner, group and mode as given on the command line or to the defaults.  It also gives any parent directories it creates those attributes.  (This is different from the SunOS 4.x {\f1{}install}, which gives directories that it creates the default attributes.)\par
\par
\pard{}{\f1{}-g {\i group}}\par
\pard{}{\f1{}--group={\i group}}\par
\pard\li720{}{K{\footnote K -g}}{K{\footnote K -group}}{K{\footnote K group ownership of installed files, setting}}Set the group ownership of installed files or directories to {\i group}. The default is the process's current group.  {\i group} may be either a group name or a numeric group id.\par
\par
\pard{}{\f1{}-m {\i mode}}\par
\pard{}{\f1{}--mode={\i mode}}\par
\pard\li720{}{K{\footnote K -m}}{K{\footnote K -mode}}{K{\footnote K permissions of installed files, setting}}Set the permissions for the installed file or directory to {\i mode}, which can be either an octal number, or a symbolic mode as in {\f1{}chmod}, with 0 as the point of departure (see {\uldb File permissions}{\v File_permissions}).  The default mode is 0755--read, write, and execute for the owner, and read and execute for group and other.\par
\par
\pard{}{\f1{}-o {\i owner}}\par
\pard{}{\f1{}--owner={\i owner}}\par
\pard\li720{}{K{\footnote K -o}}{K{\footnote K -owner}}{K{\footnote K ownership of installed files, setting}}{K{\footnote K appropriate privileges}}{K{\footnote K root as default owner}}If {\f1{}install} has appropriate privileges (is run as root), set the ownership of installed files or directories to {\i owner}. The default is {\f1{}root}.  {\i owner} may be either a user name or a numeric user ID.\par
\par
\pard{}{\f1{}-s}\par
\pard{}{\f1{}--strip}\par
\pard\li720{}{K{\footnote K -s}}{K{\footnote K -strip}}{K{\footnote K symbol table information, stripping}}{K{\footnote K stripping symbol table information}}Strip the symbol tables from installed binary executables.\par
\par
\pard{}{\f1{}-S {\i suffix}}\par
\pard{}{\f1{}--suffix={\i suffix}}\par
\pard\li720{}{K{\footnote K -S}}{K{\footnote K -suffix}}Append {\i suffix} to each backup file made with {\f1{}-b}.  See {\uldb Backup options}{\v Backup_options}.\par
\par
\pard{}{\f1{}-V {\i method}}\par
\pard{}{\f1{}--version-control={\i method}}\par
\pard\li720{}{K{\footnote K -V}}{K{\footnote K -version-control}}Change the type of backups made with {\f1{}-b}.  The {\i method} argument can be {\f1{}numbered} (or {\f1{}t}), {\f1{}existing} (or {\f1{}nil}), or {\f1{}never} (or {\f1{}simple}).  See {\uldb Backup options}{\v Backup_options}.\par
\par
\pard{}}\par
\page\pard Node: {\b mv invocation}, \keepn Next: {\uldb rm invocation}{\v rm_invocation}, Prev: {\uldb install invocation}{\v install_invocation}, Up: {\uldb Basic operations}{\v Basic_operations}\line
K{\footnote K mv invocation}
#{\footnote mv_invocation}
${\footnote {\f1{}\pard{}mv}: Move (rename) files}\par
\pard{\fs24\b {\f1{}mv}: Move (rename) files}\par
\par
\pard{}{K{\footnote K mv}} {\f1{}mv} moves or renames files (or directories).  Synopsis:\par
\par
{\pard\keep\li720\f1{}mv [{\i option}]... {\i source} {\i dest}\line
mv [{\i option}]... {\i source}... {\i directory}\par
\pard\f0{}}\par
\pard{}If the last argument names an existing directory, {\f1{}mv} moves each other given file into a file with the same name in that directory.  Otherwise, if only two files are given, it renames the first as the second.  It is an error if the last argument is not a directory and more than two files are given.\par
\par
{\f1{}\pard{}mv} can move only regular files across filesystems.\par
\par
\pard{}{K{\footnote K prompting, and {\f1{}mv}}}If a destination file exists but is normally unwritable, standard input is a terminal, and the {\f1{}-f} or {\f1{}--force} option is not given, {\f1{}mv} prompts the user for whether to replace the file.  (You might own the file, or have write permission on its directory.)  If the response does not begin with {\f1{}y} or {\f1{}Y}, the file is skipped.\par
\par
\pard{}The program accepts the following options.  Also see {\uldb Common options}{\v Common_options}.\par
\par
{\pard{}{\f1{}-b}\par
\pard{}{\f1{}--backup}\par
\pard\li720{}{K{\footnote K -b}}{K{\footnote K -backup}}{K{\footnote K backups, making}}Make backups of files that are about to be overwritten or removed.  See {\uldb Backup options}{\v Backup_options}.\par
\par
\pard{}{\f1{}-f}\par
\pard{}{\f1{}--force}\par
\pard\li720{}{K{\footnote K -f}}{K{\footnote K -force}}{K{\footnote K prompts, omitting}}Remove existing destination files and never prompt the user.\par
\par
\pard{}{\f1{}-i}\par
\pard{}{\f1{}--interactive}\par
\pard\li720{}{K{\footnote K -i}}{K{\footnote K -interactive}}{K{\footnote K prompts, forcing}}Prompt whether to overwrite each existing destination file, regardless of its permissions.  If the response does not begin with {\f1{}y} or {\f1{}Y}, the file is skipped.\par
\par
\pard{}{\f1{}-u}\par
\pard{}{\f1{}--update}\par
\pard\li720{}{K{\footnote K -u}}{K{\footnote K -update}}{K{\footnote K newer files, moving only}}Do not move a nondirectory that has an existing destination with the same or newer modification time.\par
\par
\pard{}{\f1{}-v}\par
\pard{}{\f1{}--verbose}\par
\pard\li720{}{K{\footnote K -v}}{K{\footnote K -verbose}}Print the name of each file before moving it.\par
\par
\pard{}{\f1{}-S {\i suffix}}\par
\pard{}{\f1{}--suffix={\i suffix}}\par
\pard\li720{}{K{\footnote K -S}}{K{\footnote K -suffix}}Append {\i suffix} to each backup file made with {\f1{}-b}.  See {\uldb Backup options}{\v Backup_options}.\par
\par
\pard{}{\f1{}-V {\i method}}\par
\pard{}{\f1{}--version-control={\i method}}\par
\pard\li720{}{K{\footnote K -V}}{K{\footnote K -version-control}}Change the type of backups made with {\f1{}-b}.  The {\i method} argument can be {\f1{}numbered} (or {\f1{}t}), {\f1{}existing} (or {\f1{}nil}), or {\f1{}never} (or {\f1{}simple}).  See {\uldb Backup options}{\v Backup_options}.\par
\par
\pard{}}\par
\page\pard Node: {\b rm invocation}, \keepn Next: {\uldb }{\v }, Prev: {\uldb mv invocation}{\v mv_invocation}, Up: {\uldb Basic operations}{\v Basic_operations}\line
K{\footnote K rm invocation}
#{\footnote rm_invocation}
${\footnote {\f1{}\pard{}rm}: Remove files or directories}\par
\pard{\fs24\b {\f1{}rm}: Remove files or directories}\par
\par
\pard{}{K{\footnote K rm}}{K{\footnote K removing files or directories}} {\f1{}rm} removes each given {\i file}.  By default, it does not remove directories.  Synopsis:\par
\par
{\pard\keep\li720\f1{}rm [{\i option}]... [{\i file}]...\par
\pard\f0{}}\par
\pard{}{K{\footnote K prompting, and {\f1{}rm}}}If a file is unwritable, standard input is a terminal, and the {\f1{}-f} or {\f1{}--force} option is not given, or the {\f1{}-i} or {\f1{}--interactive} option {\i is} given, {\f1{}rm} prompts the user for whether to remove the file.  If the response does not begin with {\f1{}y} or {\f1{}Y}, the file is skipped.\par
\par
\pard{}The program accepts the following options.  Also see {\uldb Common options}{\v Common_options}.\par
\par
{\pard{}{\f1{}-d}\par
\pard{}{\f1{}--directory}\par
\pard\li720{}{K{\footnote K -d}}{K{\footnote K -directory}}{K{\footnote K directories, removing with {\f1{}unlink}}}{K{\footnote K unlink}}{K{\footnote K fsck}}Remove directories with {\f1{}unlink} instead of {\f1{}rmdir}, and don't require a directory to be empty before trying to unlink it.  Only works if you have appropriate privileges.  Because unlinking a directory causes any files in the deleted directory to become unreferenced, it is wise to {\f1{}fsck} the filesystem after doing this.\par
\par
\pard{}{\f1{}-f}\par
\pard{}{\f1{}--force}\par
\pard\li720{}{K{\footnote K -f}}{K{\footnote K -force}}Ignore nonexistent files and never prompt the user.\par
\par
\pard{}{\f1{}-i}\par
\pard{}{\f1{}--interactive}\par
\pard\li720{}{K{\footnote K -i}}{K{\footnote K -interactive}}Prompt whether to remove each file.  If the response does not begin with {\f1{}y} or {\f1{}Y}, the file is skipped.\par
\par
\pard{}{\f1{}-r}\par
\pard{}{\f1{}-R}\par
\pard{}{\f1{}--recursive}\par
\pard\li720{}{K{\footnote K -r}}{K{\footnote K -R}}{K{\footnote K -recursive}}{K{\footnote K directories, removing (recursively)}}Remove the contents of directories recursively.\par
\par
\pard{}{\f1{}-v}\par
\pard{}{\f1{}--verbose}\par
\pard\li720{}{K{\footnote K -v}}{K{\footnote K -verbose}}Print the name of each file before removing it.\par
\par
\pard{}}\par
\pard{}{K{\footnote K files beginning with {\f1{}-}, removing}}{K{\footnote K {\f1{}-}, removing files beginning with}}One common question is how to remove files whose names being with a {\f1{}-}.  GNU {\f1{}rm}, like every program that uses the {\f1{}getopt} function to parse its arguments, lets you use the {\f1{}--} option to indicate that all following arguments are non-options.  To remove a file called {\f1{}-f} in the current directory, you could type either:\par
\par
{\pard\keep\li720\f1{}rm -- -f\par
\pard\f0{}}\par
\pard{}or:\par
\par
{\pard\keep\li720\f1{}rm ./-f\par
\pard\f0{}}\par
\pard{}{K{\footnote K - and Unix {\f1{}rm}}}The Unix {\f1{}rm} program's use of a single {\f1{}-} for this purpose predates the development of the getopt standard syntax.\par
\par
\page\pard Node: {\b Special file types}, \keepn Next: {\uldb Changing file attributes}{\v Changing_file_attributes}, Prev: {\uldb Basic operations}{\v Basic_operations}, Up: {\uldb Top}{\v Top}\line
K{\footnote K Special file types}
#{\footnote Special_file_types}
${\footnote \pard{}Special file types}\par
\pard{\fs24\b Special file types}\par
\par
\pard{}{K{\footnote K special file types}}{K{\footnote K file types, special}} This chapter describes commands which create special types of files (and {\f1{}rmdir}, which removes directories, one special file type).\par
\par
\pard{}{K{\footnote K special file types}}{K{\footnote K file types}}Although Unix-like operating systems have markedly fewer special file types than others, not {\i everything} can be treated only as the undifferentiated byte stream of \'A2normal files\'A2.  For example, when a file is created or removed, the system must record this information, which it does in a \'A2directory\'A2--a special type of file.  Although you can read directories as normal files, if you're curious, in order for the system to do its job it must impose a structure, a certain order, on the bytes of the file.  Thus it is a "special" type of file.\par
\par
\pard{}Besides directories, other special file types include named pipes (FIFOs), symbolic links, sockets, and so-called \'A2special files\'A2.\par
\par
{\par
\pard\keep\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880{}{\uldb ln invocation}{\v ln_invocation}\tab Make links between files.\par
{\uldb mkdir invocation}{\v mkdir_invocation}\tab Make directories.\par
{\uldb mkfifo invocation}{\v mkfifo_invocation}\tab Make FIFOs (named pipes).\par
{\uldb mknod invocation}{\v mknod_invocation}\tab Make block or character special files.\par
{\uldb rmdir invocation}{\v rmdir_invocation}\tab Remove empty directories.\par
\pard{}}\par
\page\pard Node: {\b ln invocation}, \keepn Next: {\uldb mkdir invocation}{\v mkdir_invocation}, Prev: {\uldb }{\v }, Up: {\uldb Special file types}{\v Special_file_types}\line
K{\footnote K ln invocation}
#{\footnote ln_invocation}
${\footnote {\f1{}\pard{}ln}: Make links between files}\par
\pard{\fs24\b {\f1{}ln}: Make links between files}\par
\par
\pard{}{K{\footnote K ln}}{K{\footnote K links, creating}}{K{\footnote K hard links, creating}}{K{\footnote K symbolic (soft) links, creating}}{K{\footnote K creating links (hard or soft)}} {K{\footnote K filesystems and hard links}}{\f1{}ln} makes links between files.  By default, it makes hard links; with the {\f1{}-s} option, it makes symbolic (or \'A2soft\'A2) links.  Synopses:\par
\par
{\pard\keep\li720\f1{}ln [{\i option}]... {\i source} [{\i dest}]\line
ln [{\i option}]... {\i source}... {\i directory}\par
\pard\f0{}}\par
\pard{}If the last argument names an existing directory, {\f1{}ln} links each {\i source} file into a file with the same name in that directory.  (But see the description of the {\f1{}--no-dereference} option below.)  If only one file is given, it links that file into the current directory.  Otherwise, if only two files are given, it links the first onto the second.  It is an error if the last argument is not a directory and more than two files are given.  By default, it does not remove existing files.\par
\par
\pard{}A \'A2hard link\'A2 is another name for an existing file; the link and the original are indistinguishable.  (Technically speaking, they share the same inode, and the inode contains all the information about a file--indeed, it is not incorrect to say that the inode {\i is} the file.)  On all existing implementations, you cannot make a hard links to directories, and hard links cannot cross filesystem boundaries.  (These restrictions are not mandated by {\scaps\fs16{}POSIX}, however.)\par
\par
\pard{}{K{\footnote K dereferencing symbolic links}}\'A2Symbolic links\'A2 (\'A2symlinks\'A2 for short), on the other hand, are a special file type (which not all kernels support; in particular, system V release 3 (and older) systems lack symlinks) in which the link file actually refers to a different file, by name.  When most operations (opening, reading, writing, and so on) are passed the symbolic link file, the kernel automatically \'A2dereferences\'A2 the link and operates on the target of the link.  But some operations (e.g., removing) work on the link file itself, rather than on its target.  See {\uldb Symbolic Links}{\v Symbolic_Links @library.hlp}.\par
\par
\pard{}The program accepts the following options.  Also see {\uldb Common options}{\v Common_options}.\par
\par
{\pard{}{\f1{}-b}\par
\pard{}{\f1{}--backup}\par
\pard\li720{}{K{\footnote K -b}}{K{\footnote K -backup}}{K{\footnote K backups, making}}Make backups of files that are about to be overwritten or removed.  See {\uldb Backup options}{\v Backup_options}.\par
\par
\pard{}{\f1{}-d}\par
\pard{}{\f1{}-F}\par
\pard{}{\f1{}--directory}\par
\pard\li720{}{K{\footnote K -d}}{K{\footnote K -F}}{K{\footnote K -directory}}{K{\footnote K hard links to directories}}Allow the super-user to make hard links to directories.\par
\par
\pard{}{\f1{}-f}\par
\pard{}{\f1{}--force}\par
\pard\li720{}{K{\footnote K -f}}{K{\footnote K -force}}Remove existing destination files.\par
\par
\pard{}{\f1{}-i}\par
\pard{}{\f1{}--interactive}\par
\pard\li720{}{K{\footnote K -i}}{K{\footnote K -interactive}}{K{\footnote K prompting, and {\f1{}ln}}}Prompt whether to remove existing destination files.\par
\par
\pard{}{\f1{}-n}\par
\pard{}{\f1{}--no-dereference}\par
\pard\li720{}{K{\footnote K -n}}{K{\footnote K -no-dereference}}When given an explicit destination that is a symlink to a directory, treat that destination as if it were a normal file.\par
\par
\pard\li720{}When the destination is an actual directory (not a symlink to one), there is no ambiguity.  The link is created in that directory.  But when the specified destination is a symlink to a directory, there are two ways to treat the user's request.  {\f1{}ln} can treat the destination just as it would a normal directory and create the link in it.  On the other hand, the destination can be viewed as a non-directory--as the symlink itself.  In that case, {\f1{}ln} must delete or backup that symlink before creating the new link.  The default is to treat a destination that is a symlink to a directory just like a directory.\par
\par
\pard{}{\f1{}-s}\par
\pard{}{\f1{}--symbolic}\par
\pard\li720{}{K{\footnote K -s}}{K{\footnote K -symbolic}}Make symbolic links instead of hard links.  This option merely produces an error message on systems that do not support symbolic links.\par
\par
\pard{}{\f1{}-v}\par
\pard{}{\f1{}--verbose}\par
\pard\li720{}{K{\footnote K -v}}{K{\footnote K -verbose}}Print the name of each file before linking it.\par
\par
\pard{}{\f1{}-S {\i suffix}}\par
\pard{}{\f1{}--suffix={\i suffix}}\par
\pard\li720{}{K{\footnote K -S}}{K{\footnote K -suffix}}Append {\i suffix} to each backup file made with {\f1{}-b}.  See {\uldb Backup options}{\v Backup_options}.\par
\par
\pard{}{\f1{}-V {\i method}}\par
\pard{}{\f1{}--version-control={\i method}}\par
\pard\li720{}{K{\footnote K -V}}{K{\footnote K -version-control}}Change the type of backups made with {\f1{}-b}.  The {\i method} argument can be {\f1{}numbered} (or {\f1{}t}), {\f1{}existing} (or {\f1{}nil}), or {\f1{}never} (or {\f1{}simple}).  See {\uldb Backup options}{\v Backup_options}.\par
\par
\pard{}}\par
\page\pard Node: {\b mkdir invocation}, \keepn Next: {\uldb mkfifo invocation}{\v mkfifo_invocation}, Prev: {\uldb ln invocation}{\v ln_invocation}, Up: {\uldb Special file types}{\v Special_file_types}\line
K{\footnote K mkdir invocation}
#{\footnote mkdir_invocation}
${\footnote {\f1{}\pard{}mkdir}: Make directories}\par
\pard{\fs24\b {\f1{}mkdir}: Make directories}\par
\par
\pard{}{K{\footnote K mkdir}}{K{\footnote K directories, creating}}{K{\footnote K creating directories}} {\f1{}mkdir} creates directories with the specified names.  Synopsis:\par
\par
{\pard\keep\li720\f1{}mkdir [{\i option}]... {\i name}...\par
\pard\f0{}}\par
\pard{}It is not an error if a {\i name} is already a directory; {\f1{}mkdir} simply proceeds.  But if a {\i name} is an existing file and is anything but a directory, {\f1{}mkdir} complains.\par
\par
\pard{}The program accepts the following options.  Also see {\uldb Common options}{\v Common_options}.\par
\par
{\pard{}{\f1{}-m {\i mode}}\par
\pard{}{\f1{}--mode={\i mode}}\par
\pard\li720{}{K{\footnote K -m}}{K{\footnote K -mode}}{K{\footnote K modes of created directories, setting}}Set the mode of created directories to {\i mode}, which is symbolic as in {\f1{}chmod} and uses 0777 (read, write and execute allowed for everyone) minus the bits set in the umask for the point of the departure.  See {\uldb File permissions}{\v File_permissions}.\par
\par
\pard{}{\f1{}-p}\par
\pard{}{\f1{}--parents}\par
\pard\li720{}{K{\footnote K -p}}{K{\footnote K -parents}}{K{\footnote K parent directories, creating}}Make any missing parent directories for each argument.  The mode for parent directories is set to the umask modified by {\f1{}u+wx}.  Ignore arguments corresponding to existing directories.\par
\par
\pard{}{\f1{}--verbose}\par
\pard\li720{}{K{\footnote K -verbose}}Print a message for each created directory.  This is most useful with {\f1{}--parents}.\par
\pard{}}\par
\page\pard Node: {\b mkfifo invocation}, \keepn Next: {\uldb mknod invocation}{\v mknod_invocation}, Prev: {\uldb mkdir invocation}{\v mkdir_invocation}, Up: {\uldb Special file types}{\v Special_file_types}\line
K{\footnote K mkfifo invocation}
#{\footnote mkfifo_invocation}
${\footnote {\f1{}\pard{}mkfifo}: Make FIFOs (named pipes)}\par
\pard{\fs24\b {\f1{}mkfifo}: Make FIFOs (named pipes)}\par
\par
\pard{}{K{\footnote K mkfifo}}{K{\footnote K FIFOs, creating}}{K{\footnote K named pipes, creating}}{K{\footnote K creating FIFOs (named pipes)}} {\f1{}mkfifo} creates FIFOs (also called \'A2named pipes\'A2) with the specified names.  Synopsis:\par
\par
{\pard\keep\li720\f1{}mkfifo [{\i option}] {\i name}...\par
\pard\f0{}}\par
\pard{}A \'A2FIFO\'A2 is a special file type that permits independent processes to communicate.  One process opens the FIFO file for writing, and another for reading, after which data can flow as with the usual anonymous pipe in shells or elsewhere.\par
\par
\pard{}The program accepts the following option.  Also see {\uldb Common options}{\v Common_options}.\par
\par
{\pard{}{\f1{}-m {\i mode}}\par
\pard{}{\f1{}--mode={\i mode}}\par
\pard\li720{}{K{\footnote K -m}}{K{\footnote K -mode}}{K{\footnote K modes of created FIFOs, setting}}Set the mode of created FIFOs to {\i mode}, which is symbolic as in {\f1{}chmod} and uses 0666 (read and write allowed for everyone) minus the bits set in the umask for the point of departure.  See {\uldb File permissions}{\v File_permissions}.\par
\par
\pard{}}\par
\page\pard Node: {\b mknod invocation}, \keepn Next: {\uldb rmdir invocation}{\v rmdir_invocation}, Prev: {\uldb mkfifo invocation}{\v mkfifo_invocation}, Up: {\uldb Special file types}{\v Special_file_types}\line
K{\footnote K mknod invocation}
#{\footnote mknod_invocation}
${\footnote {\f1{}\pard{}mknod}: Make block or character special files}\par
\pard{\fs24\b {\f1{}mknod}: Make block or character special files}\par
\par
\pard{}{K{\footnote K mknod}}{K{\footnote K block special files, creating}}{K{\footnote K character special files, creating}} {\f1{}mknod} creates a FIFO, character special file, or block special file with the specified name.  Synopsis:\par
\par
{\pard\keep\li720\f1{}mknod [{\i option}]... {\i name} {\i type} [{\i major} {\i minor}]\par
\pard\f0{}}\par
\pard{}{K{\footnote K special files}}{K{\footnote K block special files}}{K{\footnote K character special files}}Unlike the phrase "special file type" above, the term \'A2special file\'A2 has a technical meaning on Unix: something that can generate or receive data.  Usually this corresponds to a physical piece of hardware, e.g., a printer or a disk.  (These files are typically created at system-configuration time.)  The {\f1{}mknod} command is what creates files of this type.  Such devices can be read either a character at a time or a "block" (many characters) at a time, hence we say there are \'A2block special\'A2 files and \'A2character special\'A2 files.\par
\par
\pard{}The arguments after {\i name} specify the type of file to make:\par
\par
{\pard{}{\f1{}p}\par
\pard\li720{}{K{\footnote K p for FIFO file}}for a FIFO\par
\par
\pard{}{\f1{}b}\par
\pard\li720{}{K{\footnote K b for block special file}}for a block (buffered) special file\par
\par
\pard{}{\f1{}c}\par
\pard\li720{}{K{\footnote K c for character special file}}{K{\footnote K buffered character file}}for a character (buffered) special file\par
\par
\pard{}{\f1{}u}\par
\pard\li720{}{K{\footnote K u for unbuffered character special file}}{K{\footnote K unbuffered character special file}}for a character (unbuffered) special file\par
\par
\pard{}}\par
\pard{}When making a block or character special file, the major and minor device numbers must be given after the file type.\par
\par
\pard{}The program accepts the following option.  Also see {\uldb Common options}{\v Common_options}.\par
\par
{\pard{}{\f1{}-m {\i mode}}\par
\pard{}{\f1{}--mode={\i mode}}\par
\pard\li720{}{K{\footnote K -m}}{K{\footnote K -mode}}Set the mode of created files to {\i mode}, which is symbolic as in {\f1{}chmod} and uses 0666 minus the bits set in the umask as the point of departure.  See {\uldb File permissions}{\v File_permissions}.\par
\par
\pard{}}\par
\page\pard Node: {\b rmdir invocation}, \keepn Next: {\uldb }{\v }, Prev: {\uldb mknod invocation}{\v mknod_invocation}, Up: {\uldb Special file types}{\v Special_file_types}\line
K{\footnote K rmdir invocation}
#{\footnote rmdir_invocation}
${\footnote {\f1{}\pard{}rmdir}: Remove empty directories}\par
\pard{\fs24\b {\f1{}rmdir}: Remove empty directories}\par
\par
\pard{}{K{\footnote K rmdir}}{K{\footnote K removing empty directories}}{K{\footnote K directories, removing empty}} {\f1{}rmdir} removes empty directories.  Synopsis:\par
\par
{\pard\keep\li720\f1{}rmdir [{\i option}]... {\i directory}...\par
\pard\f0{}}\par
\pard{}If any {\i directory} argument does not refer to an existing empty directory, it is an error.\par
\par
\pard{}The program accepts the following option.  Also see {\uldb Common options}{\v Common_options}.\par
\par
{\pard{}{\f1{}-p}\par
\pard{}{\f1{}--parents}\par
\pard\li720{}{K{\footnote K -p}}{K{\footnote K -parents}}{K{\footnote K parent directories, removing}}Remove any parent directories that become empty after an argument {\i directory} is removed.\par
\par
\pard{}}\par
\pard{}See {\uldb rm invocation}{\v rm_invocation}, for how to remove non-empty directories (recursively).\par
\par
\page\pard Node: {\b Changing file attributes}, \keepn Next: {\uldb Disk usage}{\v Disk_usage}, Prev: {\uldb Special file types}{\v Special_file_types}, Up: {\uldb Top}{\v Top}\line
K{\footnote K Changing file attributes}
#{\footnote Changing_file_attributes}
${\footnote \pard{}Changing file attributes}\par
\pard{\fs24\b Changing file attributes}\par
\par
\pard{}{K{\footnote K changing file attributes}}{K{\footnote K file attributes, changing}}{K{\footnote K attributes, file}} A file is not merely its contents, a name, and a file type (see {\uldb Special file types}{\v Special_file_types}).  A file also has an owner (a userid), a group (a group id), permissions (what the owner can do with the file, what people in the group can do, and what everyone else can do), various timestamps, and other information.  Collectively, we call these a file's \'A2attributes\'A2.\par
\par
\pard{}These commands change file attributes.\par
\par
{\par
\pard\keep\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880{}{\uldb chown invocation}{\v chown_invocation}\tab Change file owners and groups.\par
{\uldb chgrp invocation}{\v chgrp_invocation}\tab Change file groups.\par
{\uldb chmod invocation}{\v chmod_invocation}\tab Change access permissions.\par
{\uldb touch invocation}{\v touch_invocation}\tab Change file timestamps.\par
\pard{}}\par
\page\pard Node: {\b chown invocation}, \keepn Next: {\uldb chgrp invocation}{\v chgrp_invocation}, Prev: {\uldb }{\v }, Up: {\uldb Changing file attributes}{\v Changing_file_attributes}\line
K{\footnote K chown invocation}
#{\footnote chown_invocation}
${\footnote {\f1{}\pard{}chown}: Change file owner and group}\par
\pard{\fs24\b {\f1{}chown}: Change file owner and group}\par
\par
\pard{}{K{\footnote K chown}}{K{\footnote K file ownership, changing}}{K{\footnote K group ownerships, changing}}{K{\footnote K changing file ownership}}{K{\footnote K changing group ownership}} {\f1{}chown} changes the user and/or group ownership of each given file.  Synopsis:\par
\par
{\pard\keep\li720\f1{}chown [{\i option}]... {\i new-owner} {\i file}...\par
\pard\f0{}}\par
\pard{}The first non-option argument, {\i new-owner}, specifies the new owner and/or group, as follows (with no embedded white space):\par
\par
{\pard\keep\li720\f1{}[{\i owner}] [ [:.] [{\i group}] ]\par
\pard\f0{}}\par
\pard{}Specifically:\par
\par
{\pard{}{\i owner}\par
\pard\li720{}If only an {\i owner} (a user name or numeric user id) is given, that user is made the owner of each given file, and the files' group is not changed.\par
\par
\pard{}{\i owner{\f1{}.}group}\par
\pard{}{\i owner{\f1{}:}group}\par
\pard\li720{}If the {\i owner} is followed by a colon or dot and a {\i group} (a group name or numeric group id), with no spaces between them, the group ownership of the files is changed as well (to {\i group}).\par
\par
\pard{}{\i owner{\f1{}.}}\par
\pard{}{\i owner{\f1{}:}}\par
\pard\li720{}If a colon or dot but no group name follows {\i owner}, that user is made the owner of the files and the group of the files is changed to {\i owner}'s login group.\par
\par
\pard{}{\i {\f1{}.}group}\par
\pard{}{\i {\f1{}:}group}\par
\pard\li720{}If the colon or dot and following {\i group} are given, but the owner is omitted, only the group of the files is changed; in this case, {\f1{}chown} performs the same function as {\f1{}chgrp}.\par
\par
\pard{}}\par
\pard{}The program accepts the following options.  Also see {\uldb Common options}{\v Common_options}.\par
\par
{\pard{}{\f1{}-c}\par
\pard{}{\f1{}--changes}\par
\pard\li720{}{K{\footnote K -c}}{K{\footnote K -changes}}{K{\footnote K changed owners, verbosely describing}}Verbosely describe the action for each {\i file} whose ownership actually changes.\par
\par
\pard{}{\f1{}-f}\par
\pard{}{\f1{}--silent}\par
\pard{}{\f1{}--quiet}\par
\pard\li720{}{K{\footnote K -f}}{K{\footnote K -silent}}{K{\footnote K -quiet}}{K{\footnote K error messages, omitting}}Do not print error messages about files whose ownership cannot be changed.\par
\par
\pard{}{\f1{}-h}\par
\pard{}{\f1{}--no-dereference}\par
\pard\li720{}{K{\footnote K -h}}{K{\footnote K -no-dereference}}{K{\footnote K symbolic links, changing owner}}{K{\footnote K lchown}}Act on symbolic links themselves instead of what they point to.  Only available if the {\f1{}lchown} system call is provided.\par
\par
\pard{}{\f1{}-v}\par
\pard{}{\f1{}--verbose}\par
\pard\li720{}{K{\footnote K -v}}{K{\footnote K -verbose}}Verbosely describe the action (or non-action) taken for every {\i file}.\par
\par
\pard{}{\f1{}-R}\par
\pard{}{\f1{}--recursive}\par
\pard\li720{}{K{\footnote K -R}}{K{\footnote K -recursive}}{K{\footnote K recursively changing file ownership}}Recursively change ownership of directories and their contents.\par
\par
\pard{}}\par
\page\pard Node: {\b chgrp invocation}, \keepn Next: {\uldb chmod invocation}{\v chmod_invocation}, Prev: {\uldb chown invocation}{\v chown_invocation}, Up: {\uldb Changing file attributes}{\v Changing_file_attributes}\line
K{\footnote K chgrp invocation}
#{\footnote chgrp_invocation}
${\footnote {\f1{}\pard{}chgrp}: Change group ownership}\par
\pard{\fs24\b {\f1{}chgrp}: Change group ownership}\par
\par
\pard{}{K{\footnote K chgrp}}{K{\footnote K group ownership, changing}}{K{\footnote K changing group ownership}} {\f1{}chgrp} changes the group ownership of each given {\i file} to {\i group}, which can be either a group name or a numeric group id.  Synopsis:\par
\par
{\pard\keep\li720\f1{}chgrp [{\i option}]... {\i group} {\i file}...\par
\pard\f0{}}\par
\pard{}The program accepts the following options.  Also see {\uldb Common options}{\v Common_options}.\par
\par
{\pard{}{\f1{}-c}\par
\pard{}{\f1{}--changes}\par
\pard\li720{}{K{\footnote K -c}}{K{\footnote K -changes}}{K{\footnote K changed files, verbosely describing}}Verbosely describe the action for each {\i file} whose group actually changes.\par
\par
\pard{}{\f1{}-f}\par
\pard{}{\f1{}--silent}\par
\pard{}{\f1{}--quiet}\par
\pard\li720{}{K{\footnote K -f}}{K{\footnote K -silent}}{K{\footnote K -quiet}}{K{\footnote K error messages, omitting}}Do not print error messages about files whose group cannot be changed.\par
\par
\pard{}{\f1{}-f}\par
\pard{}{\f1{}--no-dereference}\par
\pard\li720{}{K{\footnote K -f}}{K{\footnote K -no-dereference}}{K{\footnote K symbolic links, changing group}}{K{\footnote K lchown}}Act on symbolic links themselves instead of what they point to.  Only available if the {\f1{}lchown} system call is provided.\par
\par
\pard{}{\f1{}-v}\par
\pard{}{\f1{}--verbose}\par
\pard\li720{}{K{\footnote K -v}}{K{\footnote K -verbose}}Verbosely describe the action or non-action taken for every {\i file}.\par
\par
\pard{}{\f1{}-R}\par
\pard{}{\f1{}--recursive}\par
\pard\li720{}{K{\footnote K -R}}{K{\footnote K -recursive}}{K{\footnote K recursively changing group ownership}}Recursively change the group ownership of directories and their contents.\par
\par
\pard{}}\par
\page\pard Node: {\b chmod invocation}, \keepn Next: {\uldb touch invocation}{\v touch_invocation}, Prev: {\uldb chgrp invocation}{\v chgrp_invocation}, Up: {\uldb Changing file attributes}{\v Changing_file_attributes}\line
K{\footnote K chmod invocation}
#{\footnote chmod_invocation}
${\footnote {\f1{}\pard{}chmod}: Change access permissions}\par
\pard{\fs24\b {\f1{}chmod}: Change access permissions}\par
\par
\pard{}{K{\footnote K chmod}}{K{\footnote K changing access permissions}}{K{\footnote K access permissions, changing}}{K{\footnote K permissions, changing access}} {\f1{}chmod} changes the access permissions of the named files.  Synopsis:\par
\par
{\pard\keep\li720\f1{}chmod [{\i option}]... {\i mode} {\i file}...\par
\pard\f0{}}\par
\pard{}{K{\footnote K symbolic links, permissions of}}{\f1{}chmod} never changes the permissions of symbolic links, since the {\f1{}chmod} system call cannot change their permissions.  This is not a problem since the permissions of symbolic links are never used.  However, for each symbolic link listed on the command line, {\f1{}chmod} changes the permissions of the pointed-to file.  In contrast, {\f1{}chmod} ignores symbolic links encountered during recursive directory traversals.\par
\par
\pard{}The first non-option argument, {\i mode}, specifies the new permissions.  See the section below for details.\par
\par
\pard{}The program accepts the following options.  Also see {\uldb Common options}{\v Common_options}.\par
\par
{\pard{}{\f1{}-c}\par
\pard{}{\f1{}--changes}\par
\pard\li720{}{K{\footnote K -c}}{K{\footnote K -changes}}Verbosely describe the action for each {\i file} whose permissions actually changes.\par
\par
\pard{}{\f1{}-f}\par
\pard{}{\f1{}--silent}\par
\pard{}{\f1{}--quiet}\par
\pard\li720{}{K{\footnote K -f}}{K{\footnote K -silent}}{K{\footnote K -quiet}}{K{\footnote K error messages, omitting}}Do not print error messages about files whose permissions cannot be changed.\par
\par
\pard{}{\f1{}-v}\par
\pard{}{\f1{}--verbose}\par
\pard\li720{}{K{\footnote K -v}}{K{\footnote K -verbose}}Verbosely describe the action or non-action taken for every {\i file}.\par
\par
\pard{}{\f1{}-R}\par
\pard{}{\f1{}--recursive}\par
\pard\li720{}{K{\footnote K -R}}{K{\footnote K -recursive}}{K{\footnote K recursively changing access permissions}}Recursively change permissions of directories and their contents.\par
\par
\pard{}}\par
\page\pard Node: {\b touch invocation}, \keepn Next: {\uldb }{\v }, Prev: {\uldb chmod invocation}{\v chmod_invocation}, Up: {\uldb Changing file attributes}{\v Changing_file_attributes}\line
K{\footnote K touch invocation}
#{\footnote touch_invocation}
${\footnote {\f1{}\pard{}touch}: Change file timestamps}\par
\pard{\fs24\b {\f1{}touch}: Change file timestamps}\par
\par
\pard{}{K{\footnote K touch}}{K{\footnote K changing file timestamps}}{K{\footnote K file timestamps, changing}}{K{\footnote K timestamps, changing file}} {\f1{}touch} changes the access and/or modification times of the specified files.  Synopsis:\par
\par
{\pard\keep\li720\f1{}touch [{\i option}]... {\i file}...\par
\pard\f0{}}\par
\pard{}If the first {\i file} would be a valid argument to the {\f1{}-t} option and no timestamp is given with any of the {\f1{}-d}, {\f1{}-r}, or {\f1{}-t} options and the {\f1{}--} argument is not given, that argument is interpreted as the time for the other files instead of as a file name.\par
\par
\pard{}{K{\footnote K empty files, creating}}Any {\i file} that does not exist is created empty.\par
\par
\pard{}{K{\footnote K permissions, for changing file timestamps}}If changing both the access and modification times to the current time, {\f1{}touch} can change the timestamps for files that the user running it does not own but has write permission for.  Otherwise, the user must own the files.\par
\par
\pard{}The program accepts the following options.  Also see {\uldb Common options}{\v Common_options}.\par
\par
{\pard{}{\f1{}-a}\par
\pard{}{\f1{}--time=atime}\par
\pard{}{\f1{}--time=access}\par
\pard{}{\f1{}--time=use}\par
\pard\li720{}{K{\footnote K -a}}{K{\footnote K -time}}{K{\footnote K atime, changing}}{K{\footnote K access time, changing}}{K{\footnote K use time, changing}}Change the access time only.\par
\par
\pard{}{\f1{}-c}\par
\pard{}{\f1{}--no-create}\par
\pard\li720{}{K{\footnote K -c}}{K{\footnote K -no-create}}Do not create files that do not exist.\par
\par
\pard{}{\f1{}-d}\par
\pard{}{\f1{}--date=time}\par
\pard\li720{}{K{\footnote K -d}}{K{\footnote K -date}}{K{\footnote K time}}Use {\i time} instead of the current time.  It can contain month names, timezones, {\f1{}am} and {\f1{}pm}, etc.  See {\uldb Date input formats}{\v Date_input_formats}.\par
\par
\pard{}{\f1{}-f}\par
\pard\li720{}{K{\footnote K -f}}{K{\footnote K BSD {\f1{}touch} compatibility}}Ignored; for compatibility with BSD versions of {\f1{}touch}.\par
\par
\pard{}{\f1{}-m}\par
\pard{}{\f1{}--time=mtime}\par
\pard{}{\f1{}--time=modify}\par
\pard\li720{}{K{\footnote K -m}}{K{\footnote K -time}}{K{\footnote K mtime, changing}}{K{\footnote K modify time, changing}}Change the modification time only.\par
\par
\pard{}{\f1{}-r {\i file}}\par
\pard{}{\f1{}--reference={\i file}}\par
\pard\li720{}{K{\footnote K -r}}{K{\footnote K -reference}}Use the times of the reference {\i file} instead of the current time.\par
\par
\pard{}{\f1{}-t MMDDhhmm[[CC]YY][.ss]}\par
\pard\li720{}Use the argument (months, days, hours, minutes, optional century and years, optional seconds) instead of the current time.\par
\par
\pard{}}\par
\page\pard Node: {\b Disk usage}, \keepn Next: {\uldb Index}{\v Index}, Prev: {\uldb Changing file attributes}{\v Changing_file_attributes}, Up: {\uldb Top}{\v Top}\line
K{\footnote K Disk usage}
#{\footnote Disk_usage}
${\footnote \pard{}Disk usage}\par
\pard{\fs24\b Disk usage}\par
\par
\pard{}{K{\footnote K disk usage}} No disk can hold an infinite amount of data.  These commands report on how much disk storage is in use or available.  (This has nothing much to do with how much {\i main memory}, i.e., RAM, a program is using when it runs; for that, you want {\f1{}ps} or {\f1{}pstat} or {\f1{}swap} or some such command.)\par
\par
{\par
\pard\keep\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880{}{\uldb df invocation}{\v df_invocation}\tab Report filesystem disk space usage.\par
{\uldb du invocation}{\v du_invocation}\tab Estimate file space usage.\par
{\uldb sync invocation}{\v sync_invocation}\tab Synchronize memory and disk.\par
\pard{}}\par
\page\pard Node: {\b df invocation}, \keepn Next: {\uldb du invocation}{\v du_invocation}, Prev: {\uldb }{\v }, Up: {\uldb Disk usage}{\v Disk_usage}\line
K{\footnote K df invocation}
#{\footnote df_invocation}
${\footnote {\f1{}\pard{}df}: Report filesystem disk space usage}\par
\pard{\fs24\b {\f1{}df}: Report filesystem disk space usage}\par
\par
\pard{}{K{\footnote K df}}{K{\footnote K filesystem disk usage}}{K{\footnote K disk usage by filesystem}} {\f1{}df} reports the amount of disk space used and available on filesystems.  Synopsis:\par
\par
{\pard\keep\li720\f1{}df [{\i option}]... [{\i file}]...\par
\pard\f0{}}\par
\pard{}With no arguments, {\f1{}df} reports the space used and available on all currently mounted filesystems (of all types).  Otherwise, {\f1{}df} reports on the filesystem containing each argument {\i file}.\par
\par
\pard{}{K{\footnote K POSIXLY_CORRECT}}Disk space is shown in 1024-byte blocks by default, unless the environment variable {\f1{}POSIXLY_CORRECT} is set, in which case 512-byte blocks are used (unless the {\f1{}-k} option is given).\par
\par
\pard{}{K{\footnote K disk device file}}{K{\footnote K device file, disk}}If an argument {\i file} is a disk device file containing a mounted filesystem, {\f1{}df} shows the space available on that filesystem rather than on the filesystem containing the device node (i.e., the root filesystem).  GNU {\f1{}df} does not attempt to determine the disk usage on unmounted filesystems, because on most kinds of systems doing so requires extremely nonportable intimate knowledge of filesystem structures.\par
\par
\pard{}The program accepts the following options.  Also see {\uldb Common options}{\v Common_options}.\par
\par
{\pard{}{\f1{}-a}\par
\pard{}{\f1{}--all}\par
\pard\li720{}{K{\footnote K -a}}{K{\footnote K -all}}{K{\footnote K automounter filesystems}}{K{\footnote K ignore filesystems}}Include in the listing filesystems that have a size of 0 blocks, which are omitted by default.  Such filesystems are typically special-purpose pseudo-filesystems, such as automounter entries.  Also, filesystems of type "ignore" or "auto", supported by some operating systems, are only included if this option is specified.\par
\par
\pard{}{\f1{}-h}\par
\pard{}{\f1{}--human-readable}\par
\pard\li720{}{K{\footnote K -h}}{K{\footnote K -human-readable}}{K{\footnote K human-readable {\f1{}df} output}}Append a size letter such as {\f1{}M} for megabytes to each size.\par
\par
\pard{}{\f1{}-i}\par
\pard{}{\f1{}--inodes}\par
\pard\li720{}{K{\footnote K -i}}{K{\footnote K -inodes}}{K{\footnote K inode usage}}List inode usage information instead of block usage.  An inode (short for index node) is contains information about a file such as its owner, permissions, timestamps, and location on the disk.\par
\par
\pard{}{\f1{}-k}\par
\pard{}{\f1{}--kilobytes}\par
\pard\li720{}{K{\footnote K -k}}{K{\footnote K -kilobytes}}{K{\footnote K POSIXLY_CORRECT, overridden by {\f1{}df -k}}}{K{\footnote K kilobytes for filesystem sizes}}Print sizes in 1024-byte blocks.  This overrides the environment variable {\f1{}POSIXLY_CORRECT}.\par
\par
\pard{}{\f1{}-m}\par
\pard{}{\f1{}--megabytes}\par
\pard\li720{}{K{\footnote K -m}}{K{\footnote K -megabytes}}{K{\footnote K megabytes for filesystem sizes}}Print sizes in megabyte (that 1,048,576 bytes) blocks.\par
\par
\pard{}{\f1{}--no-sync}\par
\pard\li720{}{K{\footnote K -no-sync}}{K{\footnote K filesystem space, retrieving old data more quickly}}Do not invoke the {\f1{}sync} system call before getting any usage data.  This may make {\f1{}df} run significantly faster on systems with many disks, but on some systems (notably SunOS) the results may be slightly out of date.  This is the default.\par
\par
\pard{}{\f1{}-P}\par
\pard{}{\f1{}--portability}\par
\pard\li720{}{K{\footnote K -P}}{K{\footnote K -portability}}{K{\footnote K one-line output format}}{K{\footnote K POSIX output format}}{K{\footnote K portable output format}}{K{\footnote K output format, portable}}Use the {\scaps\fs16{}POSIX} output format.  This is like the default format except that the information about each filesystem is always printed on exactly one line; a mount device is never put on a line by itself.  This means that if the mount device name is more than 20 characters long (e.g., for some network mounts), the columns are misaligned.\par
\par
\pard{}{\f1{}--sync}\par
\pard\li720{}{K{\footnote K -sync}}{K{\footnote K filesystem space, retrieving current data more slowly}}Invoke the {\f1{}sync} system call before getting any usage data.  On some systems (notably SunOS), doing this yields more up to date results, but in general this option makes {\f1{}df} much slower, especially when there are many or very busy filesystems.\par
\par
\pard{}{\f1{}-t {\i fstype}}\par
\pard{}{\f1{}--type={\i fstype}}\par
\pard\li720{}{K{\footnote K -t}}{K{\footnote K -type}}{K{\footnote K filesystem types, limiting output to certain}}Limit the listing to filesystems of type {\i fstype}.  Multiple filesystem types can be specified by giving multiple {\f1{}-t} options.  By default, nothing is omitted.\par
\par
\pard{}{\f1{}-T}\par
\pard{}{\f1{}--print-type}\par
\pard\li720{}{K{\footnote K -T}}{K{\footnote K -print-type}}{K{\footnote K filesystem types, printing}}Print each filesystem's type.  The types printed here are the same ones you can include or exclude with {\f1{}-t} and {\f1{}-x}.  The particular types printed are whatever is supported by the system.  Here are some of the common names (this list is certainly not exhaustive):\par
\par
{\pard\li720{}{\f1{}nfs}\par
\pard\li1440{}{K{\footnote K NFS filesystem type}}An NFS filesystem, i.e., one mounted over a network from another machine.  This is the one type name which seems to be used uniformly by all systems.\par
\par
\pard\li720{}{\f1{}4.2, ufs, efs...}\par
\pard\li1440{}{K{\footnote K Linux filesystem types}}{K{\footnote K local filesystem types}}{K{\footnote K 4.2 filesystem type}}{K{\footnote K ufs filesystem type}}{K{\footnote K efs filesystem type}}A filesystem on a locally-mounted hard disk.  (The system might even support more than one type here; Linux does.)\par
\par
\pard\li720{}{\f1{}hsfs, cdfs}\par
\pard\li1440{}{K{\footnote K CD-ROM filesystem type}}{K{\footnote K High Sierra filesystem}}{K{\footnote K hsfs filesystem type}}{K{\footnote K cdfs filesystem type}}A filesystem on a CD-ROM drive.  HP-UX uses {\f1{}cdfs}, most other systems use {\f1{}hsfs} ({\f1{}hs} for `High Sierra').\par
\par
\pard\li720{}{\f1{}pcfs}\par
\pard\li1440{}{K{\footnote K PC filesystem}}{K{\footnote K DOS filesystem}}{K{\footnote K MS-DOS filesystem}}{K{\footnote K diskette filesystem}}{K{\footnote K pcfs}}An MS-DOS filesystem, usually on a diskette.\par
\par
\pard\li720{}}\par
\pard{}{\f1{}-x {\i fstype}}\par
\pard{}{\f1{}--exclude-type={\i fstype}}\par
\pard\li720{}{K{\footnote K -x}}{K{\footnote K -exclude-type}}Limit the listing to filesystems not of type {\i fstype}.  Multiple filesystem types can be eliminated by giving multiple {\f1{}-x} options.  By default, no filesystem types are omitted.\par
\par
\pard{}{\f1{}-v}\par
\pard\li720{}Ignored; for compatibility with System V versions of {\f1{}df}.\par
\par
\pard{}}\par
\page\pard Node: {\b du invocation}, \keepn Next: {\uldb sync invocation}{\v sync_invocation}, Prev: {\uldb df invocation}{\v df_invocation}, Up: {\uldb Disk usage}{\v Disk_usage}\line
K{\footnote K du invocation}
#{\footnote du_invocation}
${\footnote {\f1{}\pard{}du}: Estimate file space usage}\par
\pard{\fs24\b {\f1{}du}: Estimate file space usage}\par
\par
\pard{}{K{\footnote K du}}{K{\footnote K file space usage}}{K{\footnote K disk usage for files}} {\f1{}du} reports the amount of disk space used by the specified files and for each subdirectory (of directory arguments).  Synopsis:\par
\par
{\pard\keep\li720\f1{}du [{\i option}]... [{\i file}]...\par
\pard\f0{}}\par
\pard{}With no arguments, {\f1{}du} reports the disk space for the current directory.  The output is in 1024-byte units by default, unless the environment variable {\f1{}POSIXLY_CORRECT} is set, in which case 512-byte blocks are used (unless {\f1{}-k} is specified).\par
\par
\pard{}The program accepts the following options.  Also see {\uldb Common options}{\v Common_options}.\par
\par
{\pard{}{\f1{}-a}\par
\pard{}{\f1{}--all}\par
\pard\li720{}{K{\footnote K -a}}{K{\footnote K -all}}Show counts for all files, not just directories.\par
\par
\pard{}{\f1{}-b}\par
\pard{}{\f1{}--bytes}\par
\pard\li720{}{K{\footnote K -b}}{K{\footnote K -bytes}}Print sizes in bytes, instead of kilobytes.\par
\par
\pard{}{\f1{}-c}\par
\pard{}{\f1{}--total}\par
\pard\li720{}{K{\footnote K -c}}{K{\footnote K -total}}{K{\footnote K grand total of disk space}}Print a grand total of all arguments after all arguments have been processed.  This can be used to find out the total disk usage of a given set of files or directories.\par
\par
\pard{}{\f1{}-D}\par
\pard{}{\f1{}--dereference-args}\par
\pard\li720{}{K{\footnote K -D}}{K{\footnote K -dereference-args}}Dereference symbolic links that are command line arguments.  Does not affect other symbolic links.  This is helpful for finding out the disk usage of directories, such as {\f1{}/usr/tmp}, which are often symbolic links.\par
\par
\pard{}{\f1{}-h}\par
\pard{}{\f1{}--human-readable}\par
\pard\li720{}{K{\footnote K -h}}{K{\footnote K -human-readable}}{K{\footnote K human-readable {\f1{}df} output}}Append a size letter, such as {\f1{}M} for megabytes, to each size.\par
\par
\pard{}{\f1{}-k}\par
\pard{}{\f1{}--kilobytes}\par
\pard\li720{}{K{\footnote K -k}}{K{\footnote K -kilobytes}}{K{\footnote K POSIXLY_CORRECT, overridden by {\f1{}du -k}}}Print sizes in kilobytes.  This overrides the environment variable {\f1{}POSIXLY_CORRECT}.\par
\par
\pard{}{\f1{}-l}\par
\pard{}{\f1{}--count-links}\par
\pard\li720{}{K{\footnote K -l}}{K{\footnote K -count-links}}{K{\footnote K hard links, counting in {\f1{}du}}}Count the size of all files, even if they have appeared already (as a hard link).\par
\par
\pard{}{\f1{}-L}\par
\pard{}{\f1{}--dereference}\par
\pard\li720{}{K{\footnote K -L}}{K{\footnote K -dereference}}Dereference symbolic links (show the disk space used by the file or directory that the link points to instead of the space used by the link).\par
\par
\pard{}{\f1{}-m}\par
\pard{}{\f1{}--megabytes}\par
\pard\li720{}{K{\footnote K -m}}{K{\footnote K -megabytes}}{K{\footnote K megabytes for filesystem sizes}}Print sizes in megabyte (that 1,048,576 bytes) blocks.\par
\par
\pard{}{\f1{}-s}\par
\pard{}{\f1{}--summarize}\par
\pard\li720{}{K{\footnote K -s}}{K{\footnote K -summarize}}Display only a total for each argument.\par
\par
\pard{}{\f1{}-S}\par
\pard{}{\f1{}--separate-dirs}\par
\pard\li720{}{K{\footnote K -S}}{K{\footnote K -separate-dirs}}Report the size of each directory separately, not including the sizes of subdirectories.\par
\par
\pard{}{\f1{}-x}\par
\pard{}{\f1{}--one-file-system}\par
\pard\li720{}{K{\footnote K -x}}{K{\footnote K -one-file-system}}{K{\footnote K one filesystem, restricting {\f1{}du} to}}Skip directories that are on different filesystems from the one that the argument being processed is on.\par
\par
\pard{}}\par
\pard{}{K{\footnote K NFS mounts from BSD to HP-UX}}On BSD systems, {\f1{}du} reports sizes that are half the correct values for files that are NFS-mounted from HP-UX systems.  On HP-UX systems, it reports sizes that are twice the correct values for files that are NFS-mounted from BSD systems.  This is due to a flaw in HP-UX; it also affects the HP-UX {\f1{}du} program.\par
\par
\page\pard Node: {\b sync invocation}, \keepn Next: {\uldb }{\v }, Prev: {\uldb du invocation}{\v du_invocation}, Up: {\uldb Disk usage}{\v Disk_usage}\line
K{\footnote K sync invocation}
#{\footnote sync_invocation}
${\footnote {\f1{}\pard{}sync}: Synchronize data on disk with memory}\par
\pard{\fs24\b {\f1{}sync}: Synchronize data on disk with memory}\par
\par
\pard{}{K{\footnote K sync}}{K{\footnote K synchronize disk and memory}} {K{\footnote K superblock, writing}}{K{\footnote K inodes, written buffered}}{\f1{}sync} writes any data buffered in memory out to disk.  This can include (but is not limited to) modified superblocks, modified inodes, and delayed reads and writes.  This must be implemented by the kernel; The {\f1{}sync} program does nothing but exercise the {\f1{}sync} system call.\par
\par
\pard{}{K{\footnote K crashes and corruption}}The kernel keeps data in memory to avoid doing (relatively slow) disk reads and writes.  This improves performance, but if the computer crashes, data may be lost or the filesystem corrupted as a result. {\f1{}sync} ensures everything in memory is written to disk.\par
\par
\pard{}Any arguments are ignored, except for a lone {\f1{}--help} or {\f1{}--version} (see {\uldb Common options}{\v Common_options}).\par
\par
\page\pard Node: {\b Index}, \keepn Next: {\uldb }{\v }, Prev: {\uldb Disk usage}{\v Disk_usage}, Up: {\uldb Top}{\v Top}\line
K{\footnote K Index}
#{\footnote Index}
${\footnote \pard{}Index}\par
\pard{\fs24\b Index}\par
\par
{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880- and Unix {\f1{}rm}:\tab {\uldb rm invocation}{\v rm_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880-1:\tab {\uldb General output formatting}{\v General_output_formatting}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880-a <1>:\tab {\uldb df invocation}{\v df_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880-a <2>:\tab {\uldb touch invocation}{\v touch_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880-a:\tab {\uldb Which files are listed}{\v Which_files_are_listed}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880-A:\tab {\uldb Which files are listed}{\v Which_files_are_listed}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880-a <1>:\tab {\uldb du invocation}{\v du_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880-a:\tab {\uldb cp invocation}{\v cp_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880-all <1>:\tab {\uldb Which files are listed}{\v Which_files_are_listed}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880-all <2>:\tab {\uldb du invocation}{\v du_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880-all:\tab {\uldb df invocation}{\v df_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880-almost-all:\tab {\uldb Which files are listed}{\v Which_files_are_listed}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880-archive:\tab {\uldb cp invocation}{\v cp_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880-b <1>:\tab {\uldb cp invocation}{\v cp_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880-b <2>:\tab {\uldb mv invocation}{\v mv_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880-b <3>:\tab {\uldb Backup options}{\v Backup_options}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880-b <4>:\tab {\uldb ln invocation}{\v ln_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880-b <5>:\tab {\uldb Formatting the file names}{\v Formatting_the_file_names}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880-b <6>:\tab {\uldb install invocation}{\v install_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880-b <7>:\tab {\uldb dircolors invocation}{\v dircolors_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880-b:\tab {\uldb du invocation}{\v du_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880-B:\tab {\uldb Which files are listed}{\v Which_files_are_listed}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880-backup <1>:\tab {\uldb ln invocation}{\v ln_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880-backup <2>:\tab {\uldb install invocation}{\v install_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880-backup <3>:\tab {\uldb cp invocation}{\v cp_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880-backup <4>:\tab {\uldb Backup options}{\v Backup_options}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880-backup:\tab {\uldb mv invocation}{\v mv_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880-bourne-shell:\tab {\uldb dircolors invocation}{\v dircolors_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880-bytes:\tab {\uldb du invocation}{\v du_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880-c <1>:\tab {\uldb touch invocation}{\v touch_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880-c <2>:\tab {\uldb chmod invocation}{\v chmod_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880-c <3>:\tab {\uldb du invocation}{\v du_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880-c <4>:\tab {\uldb install invocation}{\v install_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880-c:\tab {\uldb chgrp invocation}{\v chgrp_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880-C:\tab {\uldb General output formatting}{\v General_output_formatting}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880-c <1>:\tab {\uldb dircolors invocation}{\v dircolors_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880-c <2>:\tab {\uldb Sorting the output}{\v Sorting_the_output}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880-c:\tab {\uldb chown invocation}{\v chown_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880-c-shell:\tab {\uldb dircolors invocation}{\v dircolors_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880-changes <1>:\tab {\uldb chmod invocation}{\v chmod_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880-changes <2>:\tab {\uldb chgrp invocation}{\v chgrp_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880-changes:\tab {\uldb chown invocation}{\v chown_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880-classify:\tab {\uldb General output formatting}{\v General_output_formatting}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880-color:\tab {\uldb General output formatting}{\v General_output_formatting}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880-count-links:\tab {\uldb du invocation}{\v du_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880-csh:\tab {\uldb dircolors invocation}{\v dircolors_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880-d <1>:\tab {\uldb touch invocation}{\v touch_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880-d <2>:\tab {\uldb cp invocation}{\v cp_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880-d:\tab {\uldb ln invocation}{\v ln_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880-D:\tab {\uldb What information is listed}{\v What_information_is_listed}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880-d <1>:\tab {\uldb Which files are listed}{\v Which_files_are_listed}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880-d <2>:\tab {\uldb install invocation}{\v install_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880-d:\tab {\uldb rm invocation}{\v rm_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880-D:\tab {\uldb du invocation}{\v du_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880-date:\tab {\uldb touch invocation}{\v touch_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880-dereference <1>:\tab {\uldb Which files are listed}{\v Which_files_are_listed}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880-dereference:\tab {\uldb du invocation}{\v du_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880-dereference-args:\tab {\uldb du invocation}{\v du_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880-directory <1>:\tab {\uldb rm invocation}{\v rm_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880-directory <2>:\tab {\uldb Which files are listed}{\v Which_files_are_listed}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880-directory <3>:\tab {\uldb install invocation}{\v install_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880-directory:\tab {\uldb ln invocation}{\v ln_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880-dired:\tab {\uldb What information is listed}{\v What_information_is_listed}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880-escape:\tab {\uldb Formatting the file names}{\v Formatting_the_file_names}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880-exclude-type:\tab {\uldb df invocation}{\v df_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880-f <1>:\tab {\uldb touch invocation}{\v touch_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880-f <2>:\tab {\uldb chgrp invocation}{\v chgrp_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880-f <3>:\tab {\uldb cp invocation}{\v cp_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880-f <4>:\tab {\uldb chown invocation}{\v chown_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880-f <5>:\tab {\uldb mv invocation}{\v mv_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880-f:\tab {\uldb chgrp invocation}{\v chgrp_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880-F:\tab {\uldb General output formatting}{\v General_output_formatting}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880-f <1>:\tab {\uldb ln invocation}{\v ln_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880-f:\tab {\uldb rm invocation}{\v rm_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880-F:\tab {\uldb ln invocation}{\v ln_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880-f <1>:\tab {\uldb chmod invocation}{\v chmod_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880-f:\tab {\uldb Sorting the output}{\v Sorting_the_output}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880-force <1>:\tab {\uldb ln invocation}{\v ln_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880-force <2>:\tab {\uldb cp invocation}{\v cp_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880-force <3>:\tab {\uldb rm invocation}{\v rm_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880-force:\tab {\uldb mv invocation}{\v mv_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880-format <1>:\tab {\uldb What information is listed}{\v What_information_is_listed}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880-format:\tab {\uldb General output formatting}{\v General_output_formatting}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880-full-time:\tab {\uldb General output formatting}{\v General_output_formatting}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880-G:\tab {\uldb What information is listed}{\v What_information_is_listed}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880-g:\tab {\uldb install invocation}{\v install_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880-g (ignored):\tab {\uldb ls invocation}{\v ls_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880-group:\tab {\uldb install invocation}{\v install_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880-h <1>:\tab {\uldb chown invocation}{\v chown_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880-h <2>:\tab {\uldb df invocation}{\v df_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880-h:\tab {\uldb du invocation}{\v du_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880-help:\tab {\uldb Common options}{\v Common_options}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880-hide-control-chars:\tab {\uldb Formatting the file names}{\v Formatting_the_file_names}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880-human-readable <1>:\tab {\uldb du invocation}{\v du_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880-human-readable:\tab {\uldb df invocation}{\v df_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880-I:\tab {\uldb Which files are listed}{\v Which_files_are_listed}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880-i <1>:\tab {\uldb df invocation}{\v df_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880-i <2>:\tab {\uldb What information is listed}{\v What_information_is_listed}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880-i <3>:\tab {\uldb mv invocation}{\v mv_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880-i <4>:\tab {\uldb rm invocation}{\v rm_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880-i <5>:\tab {\uldb cp invocation}{\v cp_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880-i:\tab {\uldb ln invocation}{\v ln_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880-ignore-backups:\tab {\uldb Which files are listed}{\v Which_files_are_listed}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880-ignore={\i pattern}:\tab {\uldb Which files are listed}{\v Which_files_are_listed}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880-inode:\tab {\uldb What information is listed}{\v What_information_is_listed}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880-inodes:\tab {\uldb df invocation}{\v df_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880-interactive <1>:\tab {\uldb rm invocation}{\v rm_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880-interactive <2>:\tab {\uldb cp invocation}{\v cp_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880-interactive <3>:\tab {\uldb ln invocation}{\v ln_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880-interactive:\tab {\uldb mv invocation}{\v mv_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880-k <1>:\tab {\uldb General output formatting}{\v General_output_formatting}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880-k <2>:\tab {\uldb du invocation}{\v du_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880-k:\tab {\uldb df invocation}{\v df_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880-kilobytes <1>:\tab {\uldb du invocation}{\v du_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880-kilobytes <2>:\tab {\uldb df invocation}{\v df_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880-kilobytes:\tab {\uldb General output formatting}{\v General_output_formatting}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880-l:\tab {\uldb cp invocation}{\v cp_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880-L:\tab {\uldb Which files are listed}{\v Which_files_are_listed}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880-l:\tab {\uldb du invocation}{\v du_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880-L:\tab {\uldb du invocation}{\v du_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880-l:\tab {\uldb What information is listed}{\v What_information_is_listed}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880-link:\tab {\uldb cp invocation}{\v cp_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880-literal:\tab {\uldb Formatting the file names}{\v Formatting_the_file_names}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880-m <1>:\tab {\uldb touch invocation}{\v touch_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880-m <2>:\tab {\uldb du invocation}{\v du_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880-m <3>:\tab {\uldb General output formatting}{\v General_output_formatting}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880-m <4>:\tab {\uldb df invocation}{\v df_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880-m <5>:\tab {\uldb mknod invocation}{\v mknod_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880-m <6>:\tab {\uldb install invocation}{\v install_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880-m <7>:\tab {\uldb mkdir invocation}{\v mkdir_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880-m:\tab {\uldb mkfifo invocation}{\v mkfifo_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880-megabytes <1>:\tab {\uldb df invocation}{\v df_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880-megabytes:\tab {\uldb du invocation}{\v du_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880-mode <1>:\tab {\uldb mkfifo invocation}{\v mkfifo_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880-mode <2>:\tab {\uldb install invocation}{\v install_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880-mode <3>:\tab {\uldb mkdir invocation}{\v mkdir_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880-mode:\tab {\uldb mknod invocation}{\v mknod_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880-n <1>:\tab {\uldb General output formatting}{\v General_output_formatting}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880-n:\tab {\uldb ln invocation}{\v ln_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880-N:\tab {\uldb Formatting the file names}{\v Formatting_the_file_names}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880-no-create:\tab {\uldb touch invocation}{\v touch_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880-no-dereference <1>:\tab {\uldb chgrp invocation}{\v chgrp_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880-no-dereference <2>:\tab {\uldb ln invocation}{\v ln_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880-no-dereference <3>:\tab {\uldb chown invocation}{\v chown_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880-no-dereference:\tab {\uldb cp invocation}{\v cp_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880-no-group:\tab {\uldb What information is listed}{\v What_information_is_listed}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880-no-sync:\tab {\uldb df invocation}{\v df_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880-numeric-uid-gid:\tab {\uldb General output formatting}{\v General_output_formatting}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880-o <1>:\tab {\uldb What information is listed}{\v What_information_is_listed}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880-o:\tab {\uldb install invocation}{\v install_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880-one-file-system <1>:\tab {\uldb du invocation}{\v du_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880-one-file-system:\tab {\uldb cp invocation}{\v cp_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880-owner:\tab {\uldb install invocation}{\v install_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880-P:\tab {\uldb df invocation}{\v df_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880-p:\tab {\uldb rmdir invocation}{\v rmdir_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880-P:\tab {\uldb cp invocation}{\v cp_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880-p <1>:\tab {\uldb dircolors invocation}{\v dircolors_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880-p <2>:\tab {\uldb mkdir invocation}{\v mkdir_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880-p:\tab {\uldb cp invocation}{\v cp_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880-parents <1>:\tab {\uldb cp invocation}{\v cp_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880-parents <2>:\tab {\uldb mkdir invocation}{\v mkdir_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880-parents:\tab {\uldb rmdir invocation}{\v rmdir_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880-portability:\tab {\uldb df invocation}{\v df_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880-preserve:\tab {\uldb cp invocation}{\v cp_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880-print-database:\tab {\uldb dircolors invocation}{\v dircolors_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880-print-type:\tab {\uldb df invocation}{\v df_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880-q:\tab {\uldb Formatting the file names}{\v Formatting_the_file_names}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880-Q:\tab {\uldb Formatting the file names}{\v Formatting_the_file_names}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880-quiet <1>:\tab {\uldb chown invocation}{\v chown_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880-quiet <2>:\tab {\uldb chmod invocation}{\v chmod_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880-quiet:\tab {\uldb chgrp invocation}{\v chgrp_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880-quote-name:\tab {\uldb Formatting the file names}{\v Formatting_the_file_names}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880-r:\tab {\uldb Sorting the output}{\v Sorting_the_output}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880-R <1>:\tab {\uldb chown invocation}{\v chown_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880-R <2>:\tab {\uldb chmod invocation}{\v chmod_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880-R:\tab {\uldb cp invocation}{\v cp_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880-r <1>:\tab {\uldb touch invocation}{\v touch_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880-r:\tab {\uldb rm invocation}{\v rm_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880-R <1>:\tab {\uldb rm invocation}{\v rm_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880-R <2>:\tab {\uldb Which files are listed}{\v Which_files_are_listed}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880-R:\tab {\uldb chgrp invocation}{\v chgrp_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880-recursive <1>:\tab {\uldb chmod invocation}{\v chmod_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880-recursive <2>:\tab {\uldb Which files are listed}{\v Which_files_are_listed}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880-recursive <3>:\tab {\uldb chown invocation}{\v chown_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880-recursive <4>:\tab {\uldb chgrp invocation}{\v chgrp_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880-recursive <5>:\tab {\uldb cp invocation}{\v cp_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880-recursive:\tab {\uldb rm invocation}{\v rm_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880-reference:\tab {\uldb touch invocation}{\v touch_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880-reverse:\tab {\uldb Sorting the output}{\v Sorting_the_output}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880-S:\tab {\uldb du invocation}{\v du_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880-s <1>:\tab {\uldb du invocation}{\v du_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880-s <2>:\tab {\uldb ln invocation}{\v ln_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880-s:\tab {\uldb What information is listed}{\v What_information_is_listed}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880-S <1>:\tab {\uldb Sorting the output}{\v Sorting_the_output}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880-S <2>:\tab {\uldb Backup options}{\v Backup_options}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880-S <3>:\tab {\uldb mv invocation}{\v mv_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880-S:\tab {\uldb cp invocation}{\v cp_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880-s:\tab {\uldb cp invocation}{\v cp_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880-S:\tab {\uldb install invocation}{\v install_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880-s:\tab {\uldb install invocation}{\v install_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880-S:\tab {\uldb ln invocation}{\v ln_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880-separate-dirs:\tab {\uldb du invocation}{\v du_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880-sh:\tab {\uldb dircolors invocation}{\v dircolors_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880-silent <1>:\tab {\uldb chgrp invocation}{\v chgrp_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880-silent <2>:\tab {\uldb chown invocation}{\v chown_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880-silent:\tab {\uldb chmod invocation}{\v chmod_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880-size:\tab {\uldb What information is listed}{\v What_information_is_listed}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880-sort:\tab {\uldb Sorting the output}{\v Sorting_the_output}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880-sparse={\i when}:\tab {\uldb cp invocation}{\v cp_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880-strip:\tab {\uldb install invocation}{\v install_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880-suffix <1>:\tab {\uldb install invocation}{\v install_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880-suffix <2>:\tab {\uldb ln invocation}{\v ln_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880-suffix <3>:\tab {\uldb Backup options}{\v Backup_options}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880-suffix <4>:\tab {\uldb cp invocation}{\v cp_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880-suffix:\tab {\uldb mv invocation}{\v mv_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880-summarize:\tab {\uldb du invocation}{\v du_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880-symbolic:\tab {\uldb ln invocation}{\v ln_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880-symbolic-link:\tab {\uldb cp invocation}{\v cp_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880-sync:\tab {\uldb df invocation}{\v df_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880-T:\tab {\uldb General output formatting}{\v General_output_formatting}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880-t <1>:\tab {\uldb Sorting the output}{\v Sorting_the_output}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880-t:\tab {\uldb df invocation}{\v df_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880-T:\tab {\uldb df invocation}{\v df_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880-tabsize:\tab {\uldb General output formatting}{\v General_output_formatting}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880-time <1>:\tab {\uldb touch invocation}{\v touch_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880-time <2>:\tab {\uldb Sorting the output}{\v Sorting_the_output}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880-time <3>:\tab {\uldb touch invocation}{\v touch_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880-time:\tab {\uldb Sorting the output}{\v Sorting_the_output}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880-total:\tab {\uldb du invocation}{\v du_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880-type:\tab {\uldb df invocation}{\v df_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880-u <1>:\tab {\uldb mv invocation}{\v mv_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880-u:\tab {\uldb cp invocation}{\v cp_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880-U:\tab {\uldb Sorting the output}{\v Sorting_the_output}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880-u:\tab {\uldb Sorting the output}{\v Sorting_the_output}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880-update <1>:\tab {\uldb mv invocation}{\v mv_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880-update:\tab {\uldb cp invocation}{\v cp_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880-V <1>:\tab {\uldb install invocation}{\v install_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880-V:\tab {\uldb ln invocation}{\v ln_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880-v:\tab {\uldb mv invocation}{\v mv_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880-V <1>:\tab {\uldb cp invocation}{\v cp_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880-V <2>:\tab {\uldb Backup options}{\v Backup_options}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880-V:\tab {\uldb mv invocation}{\v mv_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880-v <1>:\tab {\uldb cp invocation}{\v cp_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880-v <2>:\tab {\uldb chgrp invocation}{\v chgrp_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880-v <3>:\tab {\uldb ln invocation}{\v ln_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880-v <4>:\tab {\uldb chown invocation}{\v chown_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880-v <5>:\tab {\uldb rm invocation}{\v rm_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880-v:\tab {\uldb chmod invocation}{\v chmod_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880-verbose <1>:\tab {\uldb chgrp invocation}{\v chgrp_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880-verbose <2>:\tab {\uldb ln invocation}{\v ln_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880-verbose <3>:\tab {\uldb chown invocation}{\v chown_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880-verbose <4>:\tab {\uldb mkdir invocation}{\v mkdir_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880-verbose <5>:\tab {\uldb chmod invocation}{\v chmod_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880-verbose <6>:\tab {\uldb rm invocation}{\v rm_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880-verbose <7>:\tab {\uldb cp invocation}{\v cp_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880-verbose:\tab {\uldb mv invocation}{\v mv_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880-version:\tab {\uldb Common options}{\v Common_options}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880-version-control <1>:\tab {\uldb cp invocation}{\v cp_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880-version-control <2>:\tab {\uldb install invocation}{\v install_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880-version-control <3>:\tab {\uldb ln invocation}{\v ln_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880-version-control <4>:\tab {\uldb Backup options}{\v Backup_options}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880-version-control:\tab {\uldb mv invocation}{\v mv_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880-w:\tab {\uldb General output formatting}{\v General_output_formatting}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880-width:\tab {\uldb General output formatting}{\v General_output_formatting}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880-x <1>:\tab {\uldb General output formatting}{\v General_output_formatting}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880-x <2>:\tab {\uldb df invocation}{\v df_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880-x:\tab {\uldb du invocation}{\v du_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880-X:\tab {\uldb Sorting the output}{\v Sorting_the_output}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880-x:\tab {\uldb cp invocation}{\v cp_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx28804.2 filesystem type:\tab {\uldb df invocation}{\v df_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880abbreviations for months:\tab {\uldb Calendar date item}{\v Calendar_date_item}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880access permissions, changing:\tab {\uldb chmod invocation}{\v chmod_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880access time, changing:\tab {\uldb touch invocation}{\v touch_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880access time, sorting files by:\tab {\uldb Sorting the output}{\v Sorting_the_output}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880across, listing files:\tab {\uldb General output formatting}{\v General_output_formatting}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880adding permissions:\tab {\uldb Setting Permissions}{\v Setting_Permissions}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880ago in date strings:\tab {\uldb Relative item in date strings}{\v Relative_item_in_date_strings}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880Alaska-Hawaii Time:\tab {\uldb Timezone item}{\v Timezone_item}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880alternate ebcdic, converting to:\tab {\uldb dd invocation}{\v dd_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880always color option:\tab {\uldb General output formatting}{\v General_output_formatting}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880am in date strings:\tab {\uldb Time of day item}{\v Time_of_day_item}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880append-only directories:\tab {\uldb Mode Structure}{\v Mode_Structure}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880appropriate privileges:\tab {\uldb install invocation}{\v install_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880ascii, converting to:\tab {\uldb dd invocation}{\v dd_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880atime, changing:\tab {\uldb touch invocation}{\v touch_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880atime, sorting files by:\tab {\uldb Sorting the output}{\v Sorting_the_output}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880Atlantic Standard Time:\tab {\uldb Timezone item}{\v Timezone_item}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880attributes, file:\tab {\uldb Changing file attributes}{\v Changing_file_attributes}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880authors of {\f1{}getdate}:\tab {\uldb Authors of getdate}{\v Authors_of_getdate}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880auto color option:\tab {\uldb General output formatting}{\v General_output_formatting}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880automounter filesystems:\tab {\uldb df invocation}{\v df_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880Azores Time:\tab {\uldb Timezone item}{\v Timezone_item}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880b for block special file:\tab {\uldb mknod invocation}{\v mknod_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880backslash sequences for file names:\tab {\uldb Formatting the file names}{\v Formatting_the_file_names}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880backup files, ignoring:\tab {\uldb Which files are listed}{\v Which_files_are_listed}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880backup files, type made:\tab {\uldb Backup options}{\v Backup_options}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880backup options:\tab {\uldb Backup options}{\v Backup_options}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880backup suffix:\tab {\uldb Backup options}{\v Backup_options}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880backups, making <1>:\tab {\uldb install invocation}{\v install_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880backups, making <2>:\tab {\uldb cp invocation}{\v cp_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880backups, making <3>:\tab {\uldb mv invocation}{\v mv_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880backups, making <4>:\tab {\uldb ln invocation}{\v ln_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880backups, making:\tab {\uldb Backup options}{\v Backup_options}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880backups, making only:\tab {\uldb cp invocation}{\v cp_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880Baghdad Time:\tab {\uldb Timezone item}{\v Timezone_item}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880beginning of time, for Unix:\tab {\uldb Date input formats}{\v Date_input_formats}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880Bellovin, Steven M.:\tab {\uldb Authors of getdate}{\v Authors_of_getdate}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880Berets, Jim:\tab {\uldb Authors of getdate}{\v Authors_of_getdate}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880Berry, K.:\tab {\uldb Authors of getdate}{\v Authors_of_getdate}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880block (space-padding):\tab {\uldb dd invocation}{\v dd_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880block size:\tab {\uldb dd invocation}{\v dd_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880block size of conversion:\tab {\uldb dd invocation}{\v dd_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880block size of input:\tab {\uldb dd invocation}{\v dd_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880block size of output:\tab {\uldb dd invocation}{\v dd_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880block special files:\tab {\uldb mknod invocation}{\v mknod_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880block special files, creating:\tab {\uldb mknod invocation}{\v mknod_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880Bourne shell syntax for color setup:\tab {\uldb dircolors invocation}{\v dircolors_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880bs:\tab {\uldb dd invocation}{\v dd_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880BSD {\f1{}touch} compatibility:\tab {\uldb touch invocation}{\v touch_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880buffered character file:\tab {\uldb mknod invocation}{\v mknod_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880bugs, reporting:\tab {\uldb Introduction}{\v Introduction}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880byte-swapping:\tab {\uldb dd invocation}{\v dd_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880c for character special file:\tab {\uldb mknod invocation}{\v mknod_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880C shell syntax for color setup:\tab {\uldb dircolors invocation}{\v dircolors_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880calendar date item:\tab {\uldb Calendar date item}{\v Calendar_date_item}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880case, ignored in dates:\tab {\uldb General date syntax}{\v General_date_syntax}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880cbs:\tab {\uldb dd invocation}{\v dd_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880CD-ROM filesystem type:\tab {\uldb df invocation}{\v df_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880cdfs filesystem type:\tab {\uldb df invocation}{\v df_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880Central Alaska Time:\tab {\uldb Timezone item}{\v Timezone_item}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880Central European Time:\tab {\uldb Timezone item}{\v Timezone_item}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880Central Standard Time:\tab {\uldb Timezone item}{\v Timezone_item}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880changed files, verbosely describing:\tab {\uldb chgrp invocation}{\v chgrp_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880changed owners, verbosely describing:\tab {\uldb chown invocation}{\v chown_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880changing access permissions:\tab {\uldb chmod invocation}{\v chmod_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880changing file attributes:\tab {\uldb Changing file attributes}{\v Changing_file_attributes}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880changing file ownership:\tab {\uldb chown invocation}{\v chown_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880changing file timestamps:\tab {\uldb touch invocation}{\v touch_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880changing group ownership <1>:\tab {\uldb chown invocation}{\v chown_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880changing group ownership:\tab {\uldb chgrp invocation}{\v chgrp_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880changing special permissions:\tab {\uldb Changing Special Permissions}{\v Changing_Special_Permissions}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880character special files:\tab {\uldb mknod invocation}{\v mknod_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880character special files, creating:\tab {\uldb mknod invocation}{\v mknod_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880chgrp:\tab {\uldb chgrp invocation}{\v chgrp_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880China Coast Time:\tab {\uldb Timezone item}{\v Timezone_item}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880chmod:\tab {\uldb chmod invocation}{\v chmod_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880chown:\tab {\uldb chown invocation}{\v chown_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880color database, printing:\tab {\uldb dircolors invocation}{\v dircolors_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880color setup:\tab {\uldb dircolors invocation}{\v dircolors_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880color, distinguishing file types with:\tab {\uldb General output formatting}{\v General_output_formatting}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880COLUMNS:\tab {\uldb General output formatting}{\v General_output_formatting}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880commas, outputting between files:\tab {\uldb General output formatting}{\v General_output_formatting}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880comments, in dates:\tab {\uldb General date syntax}{\v General_date_syntax}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880common options:\tab {\uldb Common options}{\v Common_options}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880conditional executability:\tab {\uldb Conditional Executability}{\v Conditional_Executability}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880conv:\tab {\uldb dd invocation}{\v dd_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880converstion block size:\tab {\uldb dd invocation}{\v dd_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880converting while copying a file:\tab {\uldb dd invocation}{\v dd_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880copying directories recursively:\tab {\uldb cp invocation}{\v cp_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880copying existing permissions:\tab {\uldb Copying Permissions}{\v Copying_Permissions}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880copying files and directories:\tab {\uldb cp invocation}{\v cp_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880copying files and setting attributes:\tab {\uldb install invocation}{\v install_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880count:\tab {\uldb dd invocation}{\v dd_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880cp:\tab {\uldb cp invocation}{\v cp_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880crashes and corruption:\tab {\uldb sync invocation}{\v sync_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880creating directories:\tab {\uldb mkdir invocation}{\v mkdir_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880creating FIFOs (named pipes):\tab {\uldb mkfifo invocation}{\v mkfifo_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880creating links (hard or soft):\tab {\uldb ln invocation}{\v ln_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880ctime, sorting by:\tab {\uldb Sorting the output}{\v Sorting_the_output}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880database for color setup, printing:\tab {\uldb dircolors invocation}{\v dircolors_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880date format, ISO 8601:\tab {\uldb Calendar date item}{\v Calendar_date_item}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880date input formats:\tab {\uldb Date input formats}{\v Date_input_formats}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880day in date strings:\tab {\uldb Relative item in date strings}{\v Relative_item_in_date_strings}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880day of week item:\tab {\uldb Day of week item}{\v Day_of_week_item}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880daylight savings time:\tab {\uldb Timezone item}{\v Timezone_item}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880dd:\tab {\uldb dd invocation}{\v dd_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880dereferencing symbolic links:\tab {\uldb ln invocation}{\v ln_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880device file, disk:\tab {\uldb df invocation}{\v df_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880df:\tab {\uldb df invocation}{\v df_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880dir:\tab {\uldb dir invocation}{\v dir_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880dircolors:\tab {\uldb dircolors invocation}{\v dircolors_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880directories, copying:\tab {\uldb cp invocation}{\v cp_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880directories, copying recursively:\tab {\uldb cp invocation}{\v cp_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880directories, creating:\tab {\uldb mkdir invocation}{\v mkdir_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880directories, creating with given attributes:\tab {\uldb install invocation}{\v install_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880directories, removing (recursively):\tab {\uldb rm invocation}{\v rm_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880directories, removing empty:\tab {\uldb rmdir invocation}{\v rmdir_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880directories, removing with {\f1{}unlink}:\tab {\uldb rm invocation}{\v rm_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880directory listing:\tab {\uldb ls invocation}{\v ls_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880directory listing, brief:\tab {\uldb dir invocation}{\v dir_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880directory listing, recursive:\tab {\uldb Which files are listed}{\v Which_files_are_listed}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880directory listing, verbose:\tab {\uldb vdir invocation}{\v vdir_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880directory order, listing by:\tab {\uldb Sorting the output}{\v Sorting_the_output}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880dired Emacs mode support:\tab {\uldb What information is listed}{\v What_information_is_listed}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880disk device file:\tab {\uldb df invocation}{\v df_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880disk usage:\tab {\uldb Disk usage}{\v Disk_usage}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880disk usage by filesystem:\tab {\uldb df invocation}{\v df_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880disk usage for files:\tab {\uldb du invocation}{\v du_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880diskette filesystem:\tab {\uldb df invocation}{\v df_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880displacement of dates:\tab {\uldb Relative item in date strings}{\v Relative_item_in_date_strings}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880DOS filesystem:\tab {\uldb df invocation}{\v df_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880du:\tab {\uldb du invocation}{\v du_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880East Australian Standard Time:\tab {\uldb Timezone item}{\v Timezone_item}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880Eastern European Time:\tab {\uldb Timezone item}{\v Timezone_item}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880Eastern Standard Time:\tab {\uldb Timezone item}{\v Timezone_item}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880ebcdic, converting to:\tab {\uldb dd invocation}{\v dd_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880efs filesystem type:\tab {\uldb df invocation}{\v df_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880empty files, creating:\tab {\uldb touch invocation}{\v touch_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880epoch, for Unix:\tab {\uldb Date input formats}{\v Date_input_formats}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880error messages, omitting <1>:\tab {\uldb chown invocation}{\v chown_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880error messages, omitting <2>:\tab {\uldb chgrp invocation}{\v chgrp_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880error messages, omitting:\tab {\uldb chmod invocation}{\v chmod_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880executables and file type, marking:\tab {\uldb General output formatting}{\v General_output_formatting}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880execute permission:\tab {\uldb Mode Structure}{\v Mode_Structure}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880execute permission, symbolic:\tab {\uldb Setting Permissions}{\v Setting_Permissions}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880existing backup method:\tab {\uldb Backup options}{\v Backup_options}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880extension, sorting files by:\tab {\uldb Sorting the output}{\v Sorting_the_output}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880FIFOs, creating:\tab {\uldb mkfifo invocation}{\v mkfifo_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880file attributes, changing:\tab {\uldb Changing file attributes}{\v Changing_file_attributes}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880file information, preserving:\tab {\uldb cp invocation}{\v cp_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880file ownership, changing:\tab {\uldb chown invocation}{\v chown_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880file permissions:\tab {\uldb File permissions}{\v File_permissions}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880file permissions, numeric:\tab {\uldb Numeric Modes}{\v Numeric_Modes}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880file space usage:\tab {\uldb du invocation}{\v du_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880file timestamps, changing:\tab {\uldb touch invocation}{\v touch_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880file type and executables, marking:\tab {\uldb General output formatting}{\v General_output_formatting}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880file type, marking:\tab {\uldb General output formatting}{\v General_output_formatting}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880file types:\tab {\uldb Special file types}{\v Special_file_types}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880file types, special:\tab {\uldb Special file types}{\v Special_file_types}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880file utilities:\tab {\uldb Top}{\v Top}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880files beginning with {\f1{}-}, removing:\tab {\uldb rm invocation}{\v rm_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880files, copying:\tab {\uldb cp invocation}{\v cp_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880filesystem disk usage:\tab {\uldb df invocation}{\v df_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880filesystem space, retrieving current data more slowly:\tab {\uldb df invocation}{\v df_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880filesystem space, retrieving old data more quickly:\tab {\uldb df invocation}{\v df_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880filesystem types, limiting output to certain:\tab {\uldb df invocation}{\v df_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880filesystem types, printing:\tab {\uldb df invocation}{\v df_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880filesystems and hard links:\tab {\uldb ln invocation}{\v ln_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880filesystems, omitting copying to different:\tab {\uldb cp invocation}{\v cp_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880first in date strings:\tab {\uldb General date syntax}{\v General_date_syntax}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880fortnight in date strings:\tab {\uldb Relative item in date strings}{\v Relative_item_in_date_strings}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880French Winter Time:\tab {\uldb Timezone item}{\v Timezone_item}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880fsck:\tab {\uldb rm invocation}{\v rm_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880general date syntax:\tab {\uldb General date syntax}{\v General_date_syntax}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880getdate:\tab {\uldb Date input formats}{\v Date_input_formats}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880giving away permissions:\tab {\uldb Umask and Protection}{\v Umask_and_Protection}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880grand total of disk space:\tab {\uldb du invocation}{\v du_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880Greenwich Mean Time:\tab {\uldb Timezone item}{\v Timezone_item}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880group owner, default:\tab {\uldb Mode Structure}{\v Mode_Structure}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880group ownership of installed files, setting:\tab {\uldb install invocation}{\v install_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880group ownership, changing:\tab {\uldb chgrp invocation}{\v chgrp_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880group ownerships, changing:\tab {\uldb chown invocation}{\v chown_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880group, permissions for:\tab {\uldb Setting Permissions}{\v Setting_Permissions}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880Guam Standard Time:\tab {\uldb Timezone item}{\v Timezone_item}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880hard links to directories:\tab {\uldb ln invocation}{\v ln_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880hard links, counting in {\f1{}du}:\tab {\uldb du invocation}{\v du_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880hard links, creating:\tab {\uldb ln invocation}{\v ln_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880hard links, preserving:\tab {\uldb cp invocation}{\v cp_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880Hawaii Standard Time:\tab {\uldb Timezone item}{\v Timezone_item}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880help, online:\tab {\uldb Common options}{\v Common_options}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880High Sierra filesystem:\tab {\uldb df invocation}{\v df_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880history:\tab {\uldb Introduction}{\v Introduction}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880holes, copying files with:\tab {\uldb cp invocation}{\v cp_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880horizontal, listing files:\tab {\uldb General output formatting}{\v General_output_formatting}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880hour in date strings:\tab {\uldb Relative item in date strings}{\v Relative_item_in_date_strings}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880hsfs filesystem type:\tab {\uldb df invocation}{\v df_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880human-readable {\f1{}df} output <1>:\tab {\uldb du invocation}{\v du_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880human-readable {\f1{}df} output:\tab {\uldb df invocation}{\v df_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880ibs:\tab {\uldb dd invocation}{\v dd_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880if:\tab {\uldb dd invocation}{\v dd_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880ignore filesystems:\tab {\uldb df invocation}{\v df_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880inode number, printing:\tab {\uldb What information is listed}{\v What_information_is_listed}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880inode usage:\tab {\uldb df invocation}{\v df_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880inodes, written buffered:\tab {\uldb sync invocation}{\v sync_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880input block size:\tab {\uldb dd invocation}{\v dd_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880install:\tab {\uldb install invocation}{\v install_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880International Date Line East:\tab {\uldb Timezone item}{\v Timezone_item}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880International Date Line West:\tab {\uldb Timezone item}{\v Timezone_item}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880introduction:\tab {\uldb Introduction}{\v Introduction}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880ISO 8601 date format:\tab {\uldb Calendar date item}{\v Calendar_date_item}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880items in date strings:\tab {\uldb General date syntax}{\v General_date_syntax}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880Japan Standard Time:\tab {\uldb Timezone item}{\v Timezone_item}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880kilobytes for filesystem sizes:\tab {\uldb df invocation}{\v df_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880last in date strings:\tab {\uldb General date syntax}{\v General_date_syntax}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880last {\i day}:\tab {\uldb Day of week item}{\v Day_of_week_item}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880lcase, converting to:\tab {\uldb dd invocation}{\v dd_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880lchown <1>:\tab {\uldb chown invocation}{\v chown_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880lchown:\tab {\uldb chgrp invocation}{\v chgrp_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880leading directories, creating missing:\tab {\uldb install invocation}{\v install_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880links, creating:\tab {\uldb ln invocation}{\v ln_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880Linux filesystem types:\tab {\uldb df invocation}{\v df_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880ln:\tab {\uldb ln invocation}{\v ln_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880local filesystem types:\tab {\uldb df invocation}{\v df_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880long ls format:\tab {\uldb What information is listed}{\v What_information_is_listed}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880ls:\tab {\uldb ls invocation}{\v ls_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880LS_COLORS:\tab {\uldb dircolors invocation}{\v dircolors_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880MacKenzie, David:\tab {\uldb Authors of getdate}{\v Authors_of_getdate}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880Makefiles, installing programs in:\tab {\uldb install invocation}{\v install_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880manipulating files:\tab {\uldb Basic operations}{\v Basic_operations}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880megabytes for filesystem sizes <1>:\tab {\uldb df invocation}{\v df_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880megabytes for filesystem sizes:\tab {\uldb du invocation}{\v du_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880Meyering, Jim:\tab {\uldb Authors of getdate}{\v Authors_of_getdate}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880Middle European Time:\tab {\uldb Timezone item}{\v Timezone_item}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880Middle European Winter Time:\tab {\uldb Timezone item}{\v Timezone_item}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880midnight in date strings:\tab {\uldb Time of day item}{\v Time_of_day_item}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880minute in date strings:\tab {\uldb Relative item in date strings}{\v Relative_item_in_date_strings}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880minutes, timezone correction by:\tab {\uldb Time of day item}{\v Time_of_day_item}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880mkdir:\tab {\uldb mkdir invocation}{\v mkdir_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880mkfifo:\tab {\uldb mkfifo invocation}{\v mkfifo_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880mknod:\tab {\uldb mknod invocation}{\v mknod_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880modes and umask:\tab {\uldb Umask and Protection}{\v Umask_and_Protection}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880modes of created directories, setting:\tab {\uldb mkdir invocation}{\v mkdir_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880modes of created FIFOs, setting:\tab {\uldb mkfifo invocation}{\v mkfifo_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880modification time, sorting files by:\tab {\uldb Sorting the output}{\v Sorting_the_output}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880modify time, changing:\tab {\uldb touch invocation}{\v touch_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880month in date strings:\tab {\uldb Relative item in date strings}{\v Relative_item_in_date_strings}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880month names in date strings:\tab {\uldb Calendar date item}{\v Calendar_date_item}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880months, written-out:\tab {\uldb General date syntax}{\v General_date_syntax}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880Mountain Standard Time:\tab {\uldb Timezone item}{\v Timezone_item}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880MS-DOS filesystem:\tab {\uldb df invocation}{\v df_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880mtime, changing:\tab {\uldb touch invocation}{\v touch_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880multiple changes to permissions:\tab {\uldb Multiple Changes}{\v Multiple_Changes}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880multipliers after numbers:\tab {\uldb dd invocation}{\v dd_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880mv:\tab {\uldb mv invocation}{\v mv_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880named pipes, creating:\tab {\uldb mkfifo invocation}{\v mkfifo_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880New Zealand Standard Time:\tab {\uldb Timezone item}{\v Timezone_item}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880newer files, copying only:\tab {\uldb cp invocation}{\v cp_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880newer files, moving only:\tab {\uldb mv invocation}{\v mv_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880next in date strings:\tab {\uldb General date syntax}{\v General_date_syntax}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880next {\i day}:\tab {\uldb Day of week item}{\v Day_of_week_item}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880NFS filesystem type:\tab {\uldb df invocation}{\v df_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880NFS mounts from BSD to HP-UX <1>:\tab {\uldb What information is listed}{\v What_information_is_listed}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880NFS mounts from BSD to HP-UX:\tab {\uldb du invocation}{\v du_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880noerror:\tab {\uldb dd invocation}{\v dd_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880Nome Standard Time:\tab {\uldb Timezone item}{\v Timezone_item}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880non-directories, copying as special files:\tab {\uldb cp invocation}{\v cp_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880none color option:\tab {\uldb General output formatting}{\v General_output_formatting}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880none, sorting option for {\f1{}ls}:\tab {\uldb Sorting the output}{\v Sorting_the_output}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880noon in date strings:\tab {\uldb Time of day item}{\v Time_of_day_item}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880notrunc:\tab {\uldb dd invocation}{\v dd_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880now in date strings:\tab {\uldb Relative item in date strings}{\v Relative_item_in_date_strings}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880numbered backup method:\tab {\uldb Backup options}{\v Backup_options}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880numbers, written-out:\tab {\uldb General date syntax}{\v General_date_syntax}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880numeric modes:\tab {\uldb Numeric Modes}{\v Numeric_Modes}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880numeric uid and gid:\tab {\uldb General output formatting}{\v General_output_formatting}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880obs:\tab {\uldb dd invocation}{\v dd_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880octal numbers for file modes:\tab {\uldb Numeric Modes}{\v Numeric_Modes}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880of:\tab {\uldb dd invocation}{\v dd_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880one filesystem, restricting {\f1{}du} to:\tab {\uldb du invocation}{\v du_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880one-line output format:\tab {\uldb df invocation}{\v df_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880ordinal numbers:\tab {\uldb General date syntax}{\v General_date_syntax}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880other permissions:\tab {\uldb Setting Permissions}{\v Setting_Permissions}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880output block size:\tab {\uldb dd invocation}{\v dd_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880output format, portable:\tab {\uldb df invocation}{\v df_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880owner of file, permissions for:\tab {\uldb Setting Permissions}{\v Setting_Permissions}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880owner, default:\tab {\uldb Mode Structure}{\v Mode_Structure}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880ownership of installed files, setting:\tab {\uldb install invocation}{\v install_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880p for FIFO file:\tab {\uldb mknod invocation}{\v mknod_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880Pacific Standard Time:\tab {\uldb Timezone item}{\v Timezone_item}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880parent directories and {\f1{}cp}:\tab {\uldb cp invocation}{\v cp_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880parent directories, creating:\tab {\uldb mkdir invocation}{\v mkdir_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880parent directories, creating missing:\tab {\uldb install invocation}{\v install_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880parent directories, removing:\tab {\uldb rmdir invocation}{\v rmdir_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880PC filesystem:\tab {\uldb df invocation}{\v df_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880pcfs:\tab {\uldb df invocation}{\v df_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880permissions of files:\tab {\uldb File permissions}{\v File_permissions}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880permissions of installed files, setting:\tab {\uldb install invocation}{\v install_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880permissions, changing access:\tab {\uldb chmod invocation}{\v chmod_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880permissions, copying existing:\tab {\uldb Copying Permissions}{\v Copying_Permissions}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880permissions, for changing file timestamps:\tab {\uldb touch invocation}{\v touch_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880permissions, output by {\f1{}ls}:\tab {\uldb What information is listed}{\v What_information_is_listed}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880Pinard, F.:\tab {\uldb Authors of getdate}{\v Authors_of_getdate}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880pm in date strings:\tab {\uldb Time of day item}{\v Time_of_day_item}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880portable output format:\tab {\uldb df invocation}{\v df_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880POSIX output format:\tab {\uldb df invocation}{\v df_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880POSIX.2:\tab {\uldb Introduction}{\v Introduction}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880POSIXLY_CORRECT:\tab {\uldb df invocation}{\v df_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880POSIXLY_CORRECT, overridden by {\f1{}df -k}:\tab {\uldb df invocation}{\v df_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880POSIXLY_CORRECT, overridden by {\f1{}du -k}:\tab {\uldb du invocation}{\v du_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880POSIXLY_CORRECT, overridden by {\f1{}ls -k}:\tab {\uldb General output formatting}{\v General_output_formatting}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880POSIXLY_CORRECT, overrides {\f1{}ls -s}:\tab {\uldb What information is listed}{\v What_information_is_listed}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880printing color database:\tab {\uldb dircolors invocation}{\v dircolors_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880prompting, and {\f1{}ln}:\tab {\uldb ln invocation}{\v ln_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880prompting, and {\f1{}mv}:\tab {\uldb mv invocation}{\v mv_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880prompting, and {\f1{}rm}:\tab {\uldb rm invocation}{\v rm_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880prompts, forcing:\tab {\uldb mv invocation}{\v mv_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880prompts, omitting:\tab {\uldb mv invocation}{\v mv_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880pure numbers in date strings:\tab {\uldb Pure numbers in date strings}{\v Pure_numbers_in_date_strings}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880read errors, ignoring:\tab {\uldb dd invocation}{\v dd_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880read permission:\tab {\uldb Mode Structure}{\v Mode_Structure}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880read permission, symbolic:\tab {\uldb Setting Permissions}{\v Setting_Permissions}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880read system call, and holes:\tab {\uldb cp invocation}{\v cp_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880recursive directory listing:\tab {\uldb Which files are listed}{\v Which_files_are_listed}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880recursively changing access permissions:\tab {\uldb chmod invocation}{\v chmod_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880recursively changing file ownership:\tab {\uldb chown invocation}{\v chown_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880recursively changing group ownership:\tab {\uldb chgrp invocation}{\v chgrp_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880recursively copying directories:\tab {\uldb cp invocation}{\v cp_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880relative items in date strings:\tab {\uldb Relative item in date strings}{\v Relative_item_in_date_strings}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880removing empty directories:\tab {\uldb rmdir invocation}{\v rmdir_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880removing files or directories:\tab {\uldb rm invocation}{\v rm_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880removing permissions:\tab {\uldb Setting Permissions}{\v Setting_Permissions}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880reverse sorting:\tab {\uldb Sorting the output}{\v Sorting_the_output}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880rm:\tab {\uldb rm invocation}{\v rm_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880rmdir:\tab {\uldb rmdir invocation}{\v rmdir_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880root as default owner:\tab {\uldb install invocation}{\v install_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880Salz, Rich:\tab {\uldb Authors of getdate}{\v Authors_of_getdate}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880seek:\tab {\uldb dd invocation}{\v dd_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880self-backups:\tab {\uldb cp invocation}{\v cp_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880setgid:\tab {\uldb Mode Structure}{\v Mode_Structure}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880setting permissions:\tab {\uldb Setting Permissions}{\v Setting_Permissions}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880setuid:\tab {\uldb Mode Structure}{\v Mode_Structure}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880setup for color:\tab {\uldb dircolors invocation}{\v dircolors_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880SHELL environment variable, and color:\tab {\uldb dircolors invocation}{\v dircolors_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880simple backup method:\tab {\uldb Backup options}{\v Backup_options}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880SIMPLE_BACKUP_SUFFIX:\tab {\uldb Backup options}{\v Backup_options}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880single-column output of files:\tab {\uldb General output formatting}{\v General_output_formatting}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880size of files, reporting:\tab {\uldb What information is listed}{\v What_information_is_listed}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880size of files, sorting files by:\tab {\uldb Sorting the output}{\v Sorting_the_output}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880skip:\tab {\uldb dd invocation}{\v dd_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880sorting {\f1{}ls} output:\tab {\uldb Sorting the output}{\v Sorting_the_output}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880sparse files, copying:\tab {\uldb cp invocation}{\v cp_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880special file types:\tab {\uldb Special file types}{\v Special_file_types}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880special files:\tab {\uldb mknod invocation}{\v mknod_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880status time, sorting by:\tab {\uldb Sorting the output}{\v Sorting_the_output}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880sticky:\tab {\uldb Mode Structure}{\v Mode_Structure}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880stripping symbol table information:\tab {\uldb install invocation}{\v install_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880subtracting permissions:\tab {\uldb Setting Permissions}{\v Setting_Permissions}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880superblock, writing:\tab {\uldb sync invocation}{\v sync_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880swab (byte-swapping):\tab {\uldb dd invocation}{\v dd_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880swap space, saving text image in:\tab {\uldb Mode Structure}{\v Mode_Structure}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880Swedish Winter Time:\tab {\uldb Timezone item}{\v Timezone_item}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880symbol table information, stripping:\tab {\uldb install invocation}{\v install_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880symbolic (soft) links, creating:\tab {\uldb ln invocation}{\v ln_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880symbolic links, changing group:\tab {\uldb chgrp invocation}{\v chgrp_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880symbolic links, changing owner:\tab {\uldb chown invocation}{\v chown_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880symbolic links, copying:\tab {\uldb cp invocation}{\v cp_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880symbolic links, copying with:\tab {\uldb cp invocation}{\v cp_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880symbolic links, dereferencing:\tab {\uldb Which files are listed}{\v Which_files_are_listed}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880symbolic links, permissions of:\tab {\uldb chmod invocation}{\v chmod_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880symbolic modes:\tab {\uldb Symbolic Modes}{\v Symbolic_Modes}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880sync:\tab {\uldb sync invocation}{\v sync_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880sync (padding with nulls):\tab {\uldb dd invocation}{\v dd_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880synchronize disk and memory:\tab {\uldb sync invocation}{\v sync_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880terminal, using color iff:\tab {\uldb General output formatting}{\v General_output_formatting}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880text image, saving in swap space:\tab {\uldb Mode Structure}{\v Mode_Structure}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880this in date strings:\tab {\uldb Relative item in date strings}{\v Relative_item_in_date_strings}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880time:\tab {\uldb touch invocation}{\v touch_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880time of day item:\tab {\uldb Time of day item}{\v Time_of_day_item}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880timestamps, changing file:\tab {\uldb touch invocation}{\v touch_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880timezone correction:\tab {\uldb Time of day item}{\v Time_of_day_item}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880timezone item:\tab {\uldb Timezone item}{\v Timezone_item}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880today in date strings:\tab {\uldb Relative item in date strings}{\v Relative_item_in_date_strings}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880tomorrow in date strings:\tab {\uldb Relative item in date strings}{\v Relative_item_in_date_strings}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880touch:\tab {\uldb touch invocation}{\v touch_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880truncating output file, avoiding:\tab {\uldb dd invocation}{\v dd_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880u for unbuffered character special file:\tab {\uldb mknod invocation}{\v mknod_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880ucase, converting to:\tab {\uldb dd invocation}{\v dd_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880ufs filesystem type:\tab {\uldb df invocation}{\v df_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880umask and modes:\tab {\uldb Umask and Protection}{\v Umask_and_Protection}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880unblock:\tab {\uldb dd invocation}{\v dd_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880unbuffered character special file:\tab {\uldb mknod invocation}{\v mknod_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880Universal Coordinated Time:\tab {\uldb Timezone item}{\v Timezone_item}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880unlink:\tab {\uldb rm invocation}{\v rm_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880unsorted directory listing:\tab {\uldb Sorting the output}{\v Sorting_the_output}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880use time, changing:\tab {\uldb touch invocation}{\v touch_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880use time, sorting files by:\tab {\uldb Sorting the output}{\v Sorting_the_output}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880USSR Zone:\tab {\uldb Timezone item}{\v Timezone_item}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880utilities for file handling:\tab {\uldb Top}{\v Top}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880vdir:\tab {\uldb vdir invocation}{\v vdir_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880verbose ls format:\tab {\uldb What information is listed}{\v What_information_is_listed}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880version number, finding:\tab {\uldb Common options}{\v Common_options}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880version-control Emacs variable:\tab {\uldb Backup options}{\v Backup_options}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880VERSION_CONTROL:\tab {\uldb Backup options}{\v Backup_options}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880vertical sorted files in columns:\tab {\uldb General output formatting}{\v General_output_formatting}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880week in date strings:\tab {\uldb Relative item in date strings}{\v Relative_item_in_date_strings}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880West African Time:\tab {\uldb Timezone item}{\v Timezone_item}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880West Australian Standard Time:\tab {\uldb Timezone item}{\v Timezone_item}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880Western European Time:\tab {\uldb Timezone item}{\v Timezone_item}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880write permission:\tab {\uldb Mode Structure}{\v Mode_Structure}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880write permission, symbolic:\tab {\uldb Setting Permissions}{\v Setting_Permissions}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880year in date strings:\tab {\uldb Relative item in date strings}{\v Relative_item_in_date_strings}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880yesterday in date strings:\tab {\uldb Relative item in date strings}{\v Relative_item_in_date_strings}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880Yukon Standard Time:\tab {\uldb Timezone item}{\v Timezone_item}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880{\f1{}-}, removing files beginning with:\tab {\uldb rm invocation}{\v rm_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880{\f1{}csh} syntax for color setup:\tab {\uldb dircolors invocation}{\v dircolors_invocation}.\par}{\fi-2880\li2880\tx2880{\f1{}sh} syntax for color setup:\tab {\uldb dircolors invocation}{\v dircolors_invocation}.\par}\page K{\footnote Makertf}#{\footnote hcMakertf}${\footnote \pard{}About Makertf}\pard{\fs24\b About Makertf}\par\par\pard{}Makertf is a program that converts "Texinfo" files into "Rich Text Format" (RTF) files. It can be used to make WinHelp Files from GNU manuals and other documentation written in Texinfo. Visit http://www.snafu.de/~cschenk/makertf for more information.}