\input texinfo
@comment %**start of header
@setfilename id-utils.info
@settitle ID database utilities
@comment %**end of header

@include version.texi

@c Define new indices for file names and options.
@defcodeindex fl
@defcodeindex op

@c Put everything in one index (arbitrarily chosen to be the concept index).
@syncodeindex fl cp
@syncodeindex fn cp
@syncodeindex ky cp
@syncodeindex op cp
@syncodeindex pg cp
@syncodeindex vr cp

@ifinfo
@format
START-INFO-DIR-ENTRY
* ID database: (id-utils).              Identifier database utilities.
* mkid: (id-utils)mkid invocation.      Creating an ID database.
* lid: (id-utils)lid invocation.        Matching words and patterns.
* fid: (id-utils)fid invocation.        Listing a file's tokens.
* fnid: (id-utils)fnid invocation.      Looking up file names.
* xtokid: (id-utils)xtokid invocation.  Testing mkid scanners.
END-INFO-DIR-ENTRY
@end format
@end ifinfo

@ifinfo
This file documents the @file{id-utils} database utilities.

Copyright (C) 1996, 1999 Free Software Foundation, Inc.

Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of
this manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice
are preserved on all copies.

@ignore
Permission is granted to process this file through TeX and print the
results, provided the printed document carries copying permission
notice identical to this one except for the removal of this paragraph
(this paragraph not being relevant to the printed manual).

@end ignore
Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the entire
resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a permission
notice identical to this one.

Permission is granted to copy and distribute translations of this manual
into another language, under the above conditions for modified versions,
except that this permission notice may be stated in a translation.
@end ifinfo

@titlepage
@title ID database utilities
@subtitle Programs for simple, fast, high-capacity cross-referencing
@subtitle for version @value{VERSION}
@author Greg McGary
@author Tom Horsley
@end titlepage

@ifinfo
@c ************* gkm *********************************************************
@node Top
@top ID utilities

This manual documents version @value{VERSION} of the ID utilities.

@menu
* Introduction::                Overview of the tools with tutorial.
* Quick start::                 Quick start procedure.
* Common options::              Common command-line options.
* mkid invocation::             Creating an ID database.
* lid invocation::              Querying an ID database by token.
* fid invocation::              Listing a file's tokens.
* fnid invocation::             Looking up file names.
* xtokid invocation::           Testing language scanners.
* Past and Future::             History and future directions.
* Index::                       General index.
@end menu
@end ifinfo

@c ************* gkm *********************************************************
@node Introduction
@chapter Introduction

@cindex overview
@cindex introduction
@cindex ID database, definition of

An @dfn{ID database} is a binary file containing a list of file names, a
list of tokens, and a sparse matrix indicating which tokens
appear in which files.

With this database and some tools to query it (described in this
manual), many text-searching tasks become simpler and faster.  For
example, you can list all files that reference a particular
@code{#include} file throughout a huge source hierarchy, search for all
the memos containing references to a project, or automatically invoke an
editor on all files containing references to some function or variable.
Anyone with a large software project to maintain, or a large set of text
files to organize, can benefit from the ID utilities.

Although the name `ID' is short for `identifier', the ID utilities
handle more than just identifiers; they also treat other kinds of
tokens, most notably numeric constants, and the contents of certain
character strings.  Thus, this manual will use the word @dfn{token} as a
term that is inclusive of identifiers, numbers and strings.

There are several programs in the ID utilities family:

@table @file

@item mkid
scans files for tokens and builds the ID database file.

@item lid
queries the ID database for tokens, then reports matching file names or
matching lines.

@item fid
lists all tokens recorded in the database for given files, or
tokens common to two files.

@item fnid
matches the file names in the database, rather than the tokens.

@item xtokid
extracts raw tokens---helps with testing of new @file{mkid} scanners.

@end table

In addition, the ID utilities have historically provided several query
programs which are specializations of @file{lid}:

@table @file

@item gid
(alias for @samp{lid -R grep})
lists all lines containing the requested pattern.

@item eid
(alias for @samp{lid -R edit})
invokes an editor on all files containing the requested pattern, and
if possible, initiates a text search for that pattern.

@item aid
(alias for @samp{lid -ils}) treats the requested pattern
as a case-insensitive literal substring.

@end table

@cindex bugs, reporting
Please report bugs to @samp{bug-gnu-utils@@gnu.ai.mit.edu}.  Remember to
include the version number, machine architecture, input files, and any
other information needed to reproduce the bug: your input, what you
expected, what you got, and why it is wrong.  Diffs are welcome, but
please include a description of the problem as well, since this is
sometimes difficult to infer.  @xref{Bugs, , , gcc, GNU CC}.

@c ************* gkm *********************************************************
@node Quick start
@chapter Quick Start Procedure

@table @bullet

Unpack the distribution.

Type @file{./configure}

Type @samp{make}

Type @samp{make install} as a user with the appropriate privileges
(e.g., @samp{bin} or perhaps even @samp{root}).

Type @samp{cd /usr/include; mkid} to build an ID database covering
all of the system header files.

Type @samp{lid FILE}, then @samp{gid strtok}, then @samp{aid stdout}.

@end table

You have just built, installed and used the most common commands of the
GNU ID utilities.  If you ever need help remembering which system header
files contain a particular declaration, or reference a particular symbol,
you'll want to keep the ID file you built in @file{/usr/include} for
later use.  If your working directory is elsewhere at the time, simply
provide the @samp{-f /usr/include} option to @file{lid} (@pxref{Reading
options}).

@c ************* gkm *********************************************************
@node Common options
@chapter Common command-line options

@cindex common command-line options

Certain options, and regular expression syntax, are shared by various
groupings of the ID utilities.  We describe these in the sections below,
rather than repeating them for each program.

@menu
* Universal options::     Options common to all programs.
* Extraction options::    Options for programs that extract tokens from source files.
* Walker options::        Options for programs that walk file and directory trees.
* Reading options::       Options for programs that read ID databases.
* Writing options::       Options for programs that write ID databases.
* File listing options::  Options for programs that list file names.
@end menu

@c ************* gkm *********************************************************
@node Universal options
@section Options Common to All Programs

@table @samp

@item --help
@opindex --help
@cindex help, online
Print a usage message listing all available options, then exit successfully.

@item --version
@opindex --version
@cindex version number, finding
Print the version number, then exit successfully.

@end table

@c ************* gkm *********************************************************
@node Reading options
@section Options for Programs that Read ID Databases

@table @samp

@item -f @var{filename}
@itemx --file=@var{filename}
@opindex -f
@opindex --file
@cindex ID database file name

@var{Filename} is the ID database to read when processing queries.  At
present, only a single @samp{--file} option is processed, but in future
releases, more than one ID database may be named on the command line.

@item $IDPATH
@cindex ID database file name

@samp{IDPATH} is an environment variable that contains a
colon-separated list of ID database names.  If this variable is present,
and no @samp{--file} options are presented on the command line, the ID
databases named in @samp{IDPATH} are implied.@footnote{At present, this
feature isn't fully implemented, since only the first of a list of ID
database names is processed.}

@end table

If no ID databases are specified either on the command line or via the
@samp{IDPATH} environment variable, then the ID utilities search for a
file named @file{ID} in the current working directory, and then in
successive parent directories.

@c ************* gkm *********************************************************
@node Writing options
@section Options for Programs that Write ID Databases

@table @samp

@item -o @var{filename}
@itemx --output=@var{filename}
@opindex -o
@opindex --output
@cindex ID database file name

The @samp{--output} option names the file in which to write a new ID
database.  If no @samp{--output} (or @samp{--file}) option is present,
an output file named @file{ID} is implied.

@item -f @var{filename}
@itemx --file=@var{filename}
@opindex -f
@opindex --file
@cindex ID database file name

This is a synonym for @samp{--output}

@end table

@c ************* gkm *********************************************************
@node Walker options
@section Options for Programs that Walk File and Directory Trees.

The programs @file{mkid} and @file{xtokid} accept the names of files and
directories on the command line.  Files are scanned if there is a
scanner available and enabled for the file's source language.
Directories are recursively descended, searching for files whose names
match the rules listed in the @emph{language map} file (@pxref{Language
map}).

The following option controls the file tree walker:

@table @samp

@item -p @var{names}
@itemx --prune=@var{names}
@opindex -p
@opindex --prune
@cindex file tree pruning

One or more file or directory names may appear in @var{names}.  The file
tree walker will stop short at these files and directories and their
contents will not be scanned.

@end table

@c ************* gkm *********************************************************
@node File listing options
@section Options for Programs that List File Names

The programs @file{lid} and @file{fnid} can print lists of file names as
the result of queries.  The following option controls how these lists
are formatted:

@table @samp

@item -S @var{style}
@itemx --separator=@var{style}
@opindex -S
@opindex --separator
@cindex file name separator

@var{Style} may be one of @samp{braces}, @samp{space} or @samp{newline}.

The @var{style} of @samp{braces} means that file names with common
directory prefix and common suffix are printed using the shell's brace
notation in order to compress the output.  For example,
@file{../src/foo.c ../src/bar.c} can be printed in brace notation as
@file{../src/@{foo,bar@}.c}.

The @var{style}s of @samp{space} and @samp{newline} mean that file names
are separated spaces or by newlines, respectively.

If the list of files is being printed on a terminal, brace notation is
the default.  If not, file names are separated by spaces if the
@var{key} is included in the output, and by newlines the @var{key style}
is @samp{none} (@pxref{lid invocation}).

@end table

@c ************* gkm *********************************************************
@node Extraction options
@section Options for Programs that Scan Source Files

@file{mkid} and @file{xtokid} walk file trees, select source files by
name, and extract tokens from source files.  They accept the following
options:

@table @samp

@item -m @var{mapfile}
@itemx --lang-map=@var{mapfile}
@opindex -m
@opindex --lang-map
@cindex language map file

@var{mapfile} contains rules for determining the source languages from
file names @xref{Language map}.

@item -i @var{languages}
@itemx --include=@var{languages}
@opindex -i
@opindex --include
@cindex include languages

The @samp{--include} option names @var{languages} whose source files
should be scanned and incorporated into the ID database.  By default,
all languages known to the ID utilities are enabled.

@item -x @var{languages}
@itemx --exclude=@var{languages}
@opindex -x
@opindex --exclude
@cindex exclude languages

The @samp{--exclude} option names @var{languages} whose source files
should @var{not} be scanned.  The default list of excluded languages is
empty.  Note that only one of @samp{--include} or @samp{--exclude} may
be specified on the command line for a single run.

@item -l @var{language}:@var{options}
@itemx --lang-option=@var{language}:@var{options}
@opindex -l
@opindex --lang-option
@cindex language-specific option

Language-specific scanners also accept options.  @var{Language} denotes
the desired scanner, and @var{option} are the command-line options that
should be passed through to it.  For example, to pass the @var{-x
--coke-bottle} options to the scanner for the language @var{swizzle},
pass this: @var{-l swizzle:"-x --coke-bottle"}, or this:
@var{-lang-option=swizzle:"-x --coke-bottle"}, or this: @var{-l
swizzle-x -l swizzle:--coke-bottle}.  Use the @samp{--help} option to
see the command-line option summary for

@end table

@cindex scanners

To determine which tokens to extract from a file and store in the
database, @file{mkid} calls a @dfn{scanner}; we say a scanner
@dfn{recognizes} a particular language.  Scanners for several languages
are built-in to @file{mkid}; you can add your own scanners as well, as
explained in @ref{Defining scanners}.

The ID utilities determine which scanner to use for a particular file by
consulting the language-map file.  Scanners for several are already
built-in to the ID utilities.  You can see which languages have built-in
scanners, and examine their language-specific options by invoking
@samp{mkid --help} or @samp{xtokid --help}.

@menu
* Language map::                Mapping file names to source languages.
* C/C++ scanner::               For the C and C++ programming language.
* Assembler scanner::           For assembly language.
* Text scanner::                For documents or other non-source code.
* Defining scanners::           Defining new scanners in the source code.
@end menu

@c ************* gkm *********************************************************
@node Language map
@subsection Mapping file names to source languages

The file @file{id-lang.map}, installed by default in
@file{$(prefix)/share/id-lang.map}, contains rules for mapping file
names to source languages.  Each rule comprises three parts: a shell
@var{glob} pattern, a language name, and language-specific scanner
options.

The special pattern @samp{**} denotes the default source language.  This is
the language that's assigned to file names that don't match any other
pattern.

The special pattern @samp{***} should be followed by a file name.  The
named file should contain more language-map rules and is included at
this point.

The order in which rules are presented in a language-map file is
significant.  This order influences the order in which files are
displayed as the result of queries.  For example, the distributed
language-map file places all rules for C @var{.h} files ahead of
@var{.c} files, so that in general, declarations will precede
definitions in query output.  The same thing is done for C++ and its
many different source file name extensions.

Here is a pared-down version of the @file{id-lang.map} file distributed
with the ID utilities:

@example

# Default language
**			IGNORE	# Although this is listed first,
				# the default language pattern is
				# logically matched last.

# Backup files
*~			IGNORE
*.bak			IGNORE
*.bk[0-9]		IGNORE

# SCCS files
[sp].*			IGNORE

# list header files before code files
*.h			C
*.h.in			C
*.H			C++
*.hh			C++
*.hpp			C++
*.hxx			C++

# list C `meta' files next
*.l			C
*.lex			C
*.y			C
*.yacc			C

# list C code files after header files
*.c			C
*.C			C++
*.cc			C++
*.cpp			C++
*.cxx			C++

# list assembly language after C
*.[sS]			asm --comment=;
*.asm			asm --comment=;

# [nt]roff
*.[0-9]			roff
*.ms			roff
*.me			roff
*.mm			roff

# TeX and friends
*.tex			TeX
*.ltx			TeX
*.texi			texinfo
*.texinfo		texinfo

@end example

@c ************* gkm *********************************************************
@node C/C++ scanner
@subsection C/C++ Language Scanner

@cindex C scanner, predefined

The C scanner is the most commonly used.  Files that match the glob
pattern @file{*.h}, @file{*.c}, as well as @file{yacc} files that match
@file{*.y} or @file{*.yacc}, and @file{lex} files that match @file{*.l}
or @file{*.lex}, are processed with this scanner.

Scanner-specific options (Note, these options are presented
@var{without} the required @samp{-l} or @samp{--lang-option=} prefix):

@table @samp

@item -k @var{character-class}
@itemx --keep=@var{character-class}
@opindex -k
@opindex --keep
@opindex -l C:-k
@opindex -l C:--keep
@opindex --lang-option=C:-k
@opindex --lang-option=C:--keep

Consider the characters in @var{character-class} as valid constituents of
identifier names.  For example, if you are indexing C code that contains
@samp{$} in some of its identifiers, you can include these by using
@samp{--lang-option=C:--keep=$}, or @samp{-l C:"-k $"} (if you don't like
to type so much).

@item -i @var{character-class}
@itemx --ignore=@var{character-class}
@opindex -i
@opindex --ignore
@opindex -l C:-i
@opindex -l C:--ignore
@opindex --lang-option=C:-i
@opindex --lang-option=C:--ignore

Consider the characters in @var{character-class} as valid constituents of
identifier names, but discard all tokens containing these characters.
For example, if some C code has identifiers containing @samp{$}, but you
don't want these cluttering up your ID database, use
@samp{--lang-option=C:--ignore=$}, or the terser equivalent @samp{-l
C:"-i $"}.

@item -u
@itemx --strip-underscore
@opindex -u
@opindex --strip-underscore
@opindex -l C:-u
@opindex -l C:--strip-underscore
@opindex --lang-option=C:-u
@opindex --lang-option=C:--strip-underscore

Strip one leading underscore from C identifiers encapsulated as
character strings.  This option is useful if you are indexing C code
that contains symbol-table name strings for systems that prepend an
underscore to external symbols.  By default, the leading underscore is
retained.

@end table

@c ************* gkm *********************************************************
@node Assembler scanner
@subsection Assembly Language Scanner

@cindex assembler scanner
@cindex assembly language scanner

Assembly languages use a variety of commenting conventions, and allow a
variety of special characters to @emph{dirty up} local symbols,
preventing name space conflicts with symbols defined by higher-level
languages.  Also, some compilation systems prepend an underscore to
external symbols.  The options listed below are designed to address
these differences.

@table @samp

@item -c @var{character-class}
@itemx --comment=@var{character-class}
@opindex -c
@opindex --comment
@opindex -l asm:-c
@opindex -l asm:--comment
@opindex --lang-option=asm:-c
@opindex --lang-option=asm:--comment

The characters in @var{character-class} are considered left delimiters
for comments that extend until the end of the current line.

@item -k @var{character-class}
@itemx --keep=@var{character-class}
@opindex -k
@opindex --keep
@opindex -l asm:-k
@opindex -l asm:--keep
@opindex --lang-option=asm:-k
@opindex --lang-option=asm:--keep

Consider the characters of @var{character-class} as valid constituents of
identifier names.  For example, if you are indexing assembly code that
prepends @samp{.} to assembler directives, and prepends @samp{%} to
register names, you can keep these characters in the tokens by specifying
@samp{--lang-option=asm:--keep=.%}, or @samp{-l asm:"-k .%"}.

@item -i @var{character-class}
@itemx --ignore=@var{character-class}
@opindex -i
@opindex --ignore
@opindex -l asm:-i
@opindex -l asm:--ignore
@opindex --lang-option=asm:-i
@opindex --lang-option=asm:--ignore

Consider the characters of @var{character-class} as valid constituents
of identifier names, but discard all tokens containing these characters.
For example, if you don't want to clutter your ID database with
assembler directives that begin with a leading @samp{.} or with
assembler labels that contain @samp{@@}, use
@samp{--lang-option=asm:--ignore=.@@}, or @samp{-l asm:"-i .@@"}.

@item -u
@itemx --strip-underscore
@opindex -u
@opindex --strip-underscore
@opindex -l asm:-u
@opindex -l asm:--strip-underscore
@opindex --lang-option=asm:-u
@opindex --lang-option=asm:--strip-underscore

Strip one leading underscore from identifiers.  This option is useful if
your compilation system prepends an underscore to external symbols.  By
stripping the underscore, you can canonicalize such names and bring them
into conformance the way they are expressed in the C language.  By
default, the leading underscore is retained.

@item -n
@itemx --no-cpp
@opindex -n
@opindex --no-cpp
@opindex -l asm:-n
@opindex -l asm:--no-cpp
@opindex --lang-option=asm:-n
@opindex --lang-option=asm:--no-cpp

Do not recognize C preprocessor directives.  By default, such lines are
handled in the same way as they are by the C language scanner.

@end table

@c ************* gkm *********************************************************
@node Text scanner
@subsection Text Scanner

@cindex text scanner

The plain text scanner is intended for human-language documents, or as the
scanner of last resort for files that have no scanner that is more
specific.  It is customizable to the extent that character classes can
be designated as token constituents or as token delimiters.  The default
token constituents are the alpha-numerics; all other characters are
considered token delimiters.

@table @samp

@item -i @var{character-class}
@itemx --include=@var{character-class}
@opindex -i
@opindex --include
@opindex -l text:-i
@opindex -l text:--include
@opindex --lang-option=text:-i
@opindex --lang-option=text:--include

Include characters belonging to @var{character-class} in tokens.

@item -x @var{character-class}
@itemx --exclude=@var{character-class}
@opindex -x
@opindex --exclude
@opindex -l text:-x
@opindex -l text:--exclude
@opindex --lang-option=text:-x
@opindex --lang-option=text:--exclude

Exclude characters belonging to @var{character-class} from tokens, i.e., treat
them as token delimiters.

@end table

@c ************* gkm *********************************************************
@node Defining scanners
@subsection Defining New Scanners in the Source Code

@flindex scanners.c
@cindex scanners, defining in source code

@vindex languages_0

To add a new scanner in source code, you should add a new section to the
file @file{scanners.c}.  It might be easiest to clone one of the
existing scanners and modify it as necessary.  For the hypothetical
language @var{foo}, you must define the functions @code{get_token_foo},
@code{parse_args_foo}, @code{help_me_foo}, as well as the tables
@code{long_options_foo} and @code{args_foo}.  If your scanner is
modeled after one of the existing scanners, you'll also need a
character-attribute table @code{ctype_foo}.

This is not a terribly difficult programming task, but it requires
recompiling and installing the new version of @file{mkid} and @file{xtokid}.
You should use @file{xtokid} to test the operation of the new scanner.

Once these functions and tables are ready, add function prototypes and
an entry to the @code{languages_0} table near the beginning of the file.

Be warned that the existing scanners are built for speed, not elegance
or readability.  You might wish to create a new scanner that's easier to
read and understand if you don't feel that speed is so important.

@c ************* gkm *********************************************************
@node mkid invocation
@chapter @samp{mkid}: Creating an ID Database
@cindex creating databases
@cindex databases, creating
@cindex ID file format
@cindex architecture-independence
@cindex sharing ID files

@file{mkid} builds an ID database.  It accepts the names of files and/or
directories on the command line, selects files that have an enabled
scanner, then extracts and stores tokens from those files.  The
resulting ID database is architecture- and byte-order-independent so it
can be shared among all systems.

The primary virtues of @file{mkid} are speed and high capacity.  The
size of the source trees it can index is limited only by available
system memory.  @file{mkid}'s indexing algorithm is very space-efficient
and exhibits excellent locality-of-reference, and so is capable of
operating with a working-set size that is only half the size of its
virtual address space.  A typical @sc{UNIX}-like operating system with
16 megabytes of system memory should be able to build an ID database
covering approximately 12,000-14,000 source files totaling
approximately 50--100 Megabytes.  A 66 MHz 486 computer can build such
a large ID database in approximately 10-15 minutes.

@pindex cron
In a future release, @file{mkid} will be able to incrementally update an
ID database much faster than it can build one from scratch.  Until this
feature becomes available, it might be a good idea to schedule a
@file{cron} job to regularly update large ID databases during off-hours.

@file{mkid} writes the ID file, therefore it accepts the @samp{--output}
(and @samp{--file}) options as described in @ref{Writing options}.
@file{mkid} extracts tokens from source files, therefore it accepts the
@samp{--lang-map}, @samp{--include}, @samp{--exclude}, and
@samp{--lang-option} options, as well as the language-specific scanner
options, all of which are described in @ref{Extraction options}.
@file{mkid} walks file trees, therefore it handles file and directory
names on its command line and the @samp{--prune} option as described in
@ref{Walker options}.

In addition, @file{mkid} accepts the following command-line options:

@table @samp

@item -s
@itemx --statistics
@opindex -s
@opindex --statistics
@cindex statistics

@file{mkid} reports statistics about resource usage at the end of its
run.

@item -v
@itemx --verbose
@opindex -v
@opindex --verbose
@cindex @file{mkid} progress

@file{mkid} reports statistics about each file as it is scanned, and
about the resource usage of its indexing algorithm at regular intervals.

@end table

@c ************* gkm *********************************************************
@node lid invocation
@chapter @code{lid}: Querying an ID Database by Token

The @file{lid} program accepts @var{patterns} on the command line which
it matches against the tokens stored in an ID database.  The
interpretation of a @var{pattern} is determined by the makeup of the
@var{pattern} string itself, or can be overridden by command-line
options.  If a @var{pattern} contains regular expression meta-characters,
it is used to perform a regular-expression substring search.  If no such
meta-characters are present, @var{pattern} is used to perform a literal
word search.  (By default, all searches are sensitive to alphabetic
case.)  If no @var{pattern} is supplied on the command line, @file{lid}
lists every entry in the ID database.

@file{lid} reads the ID database, therefore it accepts the @samp{--file}
option, and consults the @samp{IDPATH} environment variable, as
described in @ref{Reading options}.  @file{lid} lists file names,
therefore it accepts the @samp{--separator} option, as described in
@ref{File listing options}.

In addition, @code{lid} accepts the following command-line options:

@table @samp

@item -i
@itemx --ignore-case
@opindex -i
@opindex --ignore-case
@cindex alphabetic case, ignoring differences in
@cindex ignoring differences in alphabetic case

Ignoring differences in alphabetic case between the @var{pattern} and
the tokens in the ID database.

@item -l
@itemx --literal
@opindex -l
@opindex --literal

Match @var{pattern} as a literal string.  Use this option if
@var{pattern} contains regular-expression meta-characters, but you don't
wish to perform a regular-expression search.

@item -r
@itemx --regexp
@opindex -r
@opindex --regexp

Match @var{pattern} as an @emph{extended} regular expression@footnote{Extended
regular expressions are the same as those accepted by @file{egrep}.}.
Use this option if no regular-expression expression meta-characters are
present in @var{pattern}, but you wish to force a regular-expression
search (note: in this case, a @emph{literal substring} search might be
faster).

@item -w
@itemx --word
@opindex -w
@opindex --word

Match @var{pattern} using a word-delimited (non substring) search.  This
is the default for literal searches.

@item -s
@itemx --substring
@opindex -s
@opindex --substring

Match @var{pattern} using a substring (non word-delimited) search.  This
is the default for regular expression searches.

@item -k @var{style}
@itemx --key=@var{style}
@opindex -k
@opindex --substring

@var{Style} can be one of @samp{token}, @samp{pattern} or @samp{none}.
This option controls how the subject of the query is presented.  This is
best illustrated by example:

@example
$ lid --key=token '^dest.'
destaddr       libsys/memcpy.c
destination    libsys/regex.c
destlst        libsys/rx.c
destpos        libsys/rx.c
destset        libsys/rx.h libsys/rx.c

$ lid --key=pattern '^dest.'
^dest.         libsys/rx.h libsys/@{memcpy,regex,rx@}.c

$ lid --key=none '^dest.'
libsys/rx.h libsys/@{memcpy,regex,rx@}.c
@end example

When @samp{--key} is either @samp{token} or @samp{pattern}, the first
column of output is a @var{token} or @var{pattern}, respectively.  When
@samp{--key} is @samp{none}, neither of these is printed, and the file
name list begins immediately.  The default is @samp{token}.

@item -R @var{style}
@itemx --result=@var{style}
@opindex -R
@opindex --result

@var{Style} can be one of @samp{filenames}, @samp{grep}, @samp{edit} or
@samp{none}.  This option controls how the value associated with the
query's @var{key} presented.  When @var{style} is @samp{filenames}, a
list of file names is printed (this is the default).  When @var{style}
is @samp{grep}, the lines that match @var{pattern} are printed in the
same format as @samp{egrep -n}.  When @var{style} is @samp{edit}, the
file names are passed to an editor, and if possible @var{pattern} is
passed as an initial search string (@pxref{eid invocation}).  When
@var{style} is @samp{none}, the file names are not processed in any way.
This can be useful if you wish to see what tokens match a @var{pattern},
but don't care about where they reside.

@item -d
@itemx -o
@itemx -x
@opindex -d
@opindex -o
@opindex -x
@cindex radix of numeric matches, specifying
@cindex numeric matches, specifying radix of

These options may be used in any combination to specify the radix of
numeric matches.  @samp{-d} allows matching on decimal numbers,
@samp{-o} on octal numbers, and @samp{-x} on hexadecimal numbers.  Any
combination of these options may be used.  The default is to match all
three radixes.

@item -F @var{range}
@itemx --frequency=@var{range}
@opindex -F
@opindex --frequency
@cindex single matches, showing

Match tokens whose occurrence count falls in @var{range}.  @var{Range}
may be expressed as a single number @var{n}, or as a range
@var{n@code{..}m}.  Either limit of the range may be omitted (e.g.,
@var{@code{..}m}, or @var{n..@code{..}}).  If the lower limit @var{n} is
omitted, it defaults to @code{1}.  If the upper limit is omitted, it
defaults in the present implementation to @code{65535}, the maximum
value of an unsigned 16-bit integer.

Particularly useful queries are @samp{lid -F1}, which helps locate
identifiers that are defined but never used, or are used but never
defined.  Similarly, @code{lid -F2} can help find functions that possess
a prototype declaration and a definition, but are never called.

@item -a @var{number}
@itemx --ambiguous=@var{number}
@opindex -a
@opindex --ambiguous
@cindex ambiguous identifier names, finding

List identifiers (not numbers) that are ambiguous for the first
@var{number} characters.  This feature might be in useful when porting
programs to ancient pea-brained compilers that don't support long
identifier names.  However, the best long-term option is to set such
systems on fire.

@end table

@menu
* lid aliases::                 Aliases for specialized lid queries
* Emacs gid interface::         GNU Emacs query interface
* eid invocation::              Invoking an editor on query results
@end menu

@c ************* gkm *********************************************************
@node lid aliases
@section Aliases for Specialized @file{lid} Queries

Historically, the ID utilities have provided several query interfaces
which are specializations of @code{lid} (@pxref{lid invocation}).

@table @file

@item gid
(alias for @samp{lid -R grep})
lists all lines containing the requested pattern.

@item eid
(alias for @samp{lid -R edit})
invokes an editor on all files containing the requested pattern, and
optionally initiates a text search for that pattern.

@item aid
(alias for @samp{lid -ils}) treats the requested pattern
as a case-insensitive literal substring.

@end table

@c ***************************************************************************
@node Emacs gid interface
@section GNU Emacs query interface

@cindex Emacs interface to @code{gid}
@flindex id-utils.el @r{interface to Emacs}

@vindex load-path
The @code{id-utils} source distribution comes with a file @file{id-utils.el},
which defines a GNU Emacs interface to @code{gid}.  To install it, put
@file{id-utils.el} somewhere that Emacs will find it (i.e., in your
@code{load-path}) and put

@example
(autoload 'gid "gid" nil t)
@end example

@noindent in one of Emacs' initialization files, e.g., @file{~/.emacs}.
You will then be able to use @kbd{M-x gid} to run the command.

@findex gid @r{Emacs function}
The @code{gid} function prompts you with the word around point.  If you
want to search for something else, simply delete the line and type the
pattern of interest.

@flindex *compilation* @r{Emacs buffer}
The function then runs the @code{gid} program in a @samp{*compilation*}
buffer, so the normal @code{next-error} function can be used to visit
all the places the identifier is found (@pxref{Compilation,,, emacs, The
GNU Emacs Manual}).

@c ************* gkm *********************************************************
@node eid invocation
@section @code{eid}: Invoking an Editor on Query Results

@pindex eid

@samp{lid -R edit} is an editing interface for the ID utilities that is
most commonly used with @file{vi}.  Emacs users should use the interface
defined in @code{id-utils.el} (@pxref{Emacs gid interface}).  The ID
utilities include an alias called @file{eid}, and for the sake of
brevity, we'll use this alias for the remainder of this section.
@file{eid} performs a @file{lid}-style, then asks if you wish to edit
the files.  If your query yields more than one line of output, you will
be prompted after each line.  This is the prompt you'll see:

@example
Edit? [y1-9^S/nq]
@end example

@noindent
You may respond with:

@table @samp

@item y
Edit all files listed.

@item 1@dots{}9
Edit all files starting at the @math{@var{n} + 1}'st file.

@item /@var{string} @r{or} @kbd{CTRL-S}@var{regexp}
Search into the file list, and begin editing with the first file name
that matches the regular expression @var{regexp}.

@item n
Don't edit any files.  If another line of query output is pending,
advance to that line, for which another @samp{Edit?} prompt will appear.

@item q
Quit---don't edit any files, and don't process any more lines of query
output.

@end table

Here is an example:

@example
prompt$ eid FILE \^print
FILE           @{ansi2knr,fid,filenames,idfile,idx,lid,misc,@dots{}@}.c
Edit? [y1-9^S/nq] n
^print         @{ansi2knr,fid,getopt,getopt1,lid,mkid,regex,scanners@}.c
Edit? [y1-9^S/nq] 2
@end example

@noindent This will start editing at @file{getopt}.c.

@code{eid} invokes the editor defined by the environment variable
@samp{VISUAL}.  If @samp{VISUAL} is undefined, it uses the environment
variable @samp{EDITOR} instead.  If @samp{EDITOR} is undefined, it
defaults to @file{vi}.  It is possible for @file{eid} to pass the editor
an initial search pattern so that your cursor will immediately alight on
the token of interest.  This feature is controlled by the following
environment variables:

@table @samp

@item EIDARG
@vindex EIDARG
@cindex search for token, initial
A printf(3) format string for the editor argument to search for the
matching token.  For @code{vi}, this should be @samp{+/%s/}.

@item EIDLDEL
@vindex EIDLDEL
@cindex left delimiter editor argument
@cindex beginning-of-word editor argument
The regular-expression meta-character(s) for delimiting the beginning of
a word (the `@file{eid} Left DELimiter').  @code{eid} inserts this in
front of the matching token when a word-search is desired.  For
@file{vi}, this should be @samp{\<}.

@item EIDRDEL
@vindex EIDRDEL
@cindex right delimiter editor argument
@cindex end-of-word editor argument
The regular-expression meta-character(s) for delimiting the end of
a word (the `@file{eid} Right DELimiter').  @code{eid} inserts this in
end of the matching token when a word-search is desired.  For
@file{vi}, this should be @samp{\>}.

@end table

@c ************* gkm *********************************************************
@node fid invocation
@chapter @code{fid}: Listing a file's tokens

@pindex fid
@cindex tokens in a file
@cindex tokens common to two files

@file{fid} prints the tokens found in a given file.  If two file names
are passed on the command line, @file{fid} prints the tokens that are
common to both files (i.e., the @emph{set intersection} of the two token
sets).

@file{fid} reads the ID database, therefore it accepts the @samp{--file}
option, and consults the @samp{IDPATH} environment variable, as
described in @ref{Reading options}.

If the standard output is attached to a terminal, the printed tokens are
separated by spaces.  Otherwise, the tokens are printed one per line.

@c ************* gkm *********************************************************
@node fnid invocation
@chapter @code{fnid}: Looking up filenames

@pindex fnid
@cindex filenames, matching
@cindex matching filenames

@file{fnid} queries the list of file names stored in the ID database.
It accepts shell @emph{wildcard} patterns on the command line.  If no
pattern is supplied, @file{*} is implied.  @file{fnid} prints the
file names that match the given patterns.

@file{fnid} prints file names, and as such accepts the
@samp{--separator} option as described in @ref{File listing options}.

For example, the command:

@example
fnid \*.c
@end example

@noindent lists all the @file{.c} files in the database.  (The @samp{\}
here protects the @samp{*} from being expanded by the shell.)

@c ************* gkm *********************************************************
@node xtokid invocation
@chapter @file{xtokid}: Testing Language Scanners

@file{xtokid} accepts the names of files and/or directories on the
command line, then extracts and prints a stream of tokens from those
files for which it has a valid, enabled scanner.  This is useful
primarily for debugging new @file{mkid} scanners (@pxref{Defining
scanners}).

@file{xtokid} extracts tokens from source files, therefore it accepts
the @samp{--lang-map}, @samp{--include}, @samp{--exclude}, and
@samp{--lang-option} options, as well as the language-specific scanner
options, all of which are described in @ref{Extraction options}.
@file{xtokid} walks file trees, therefore it handles file and directory
names on its command line and the @samp{--prune} option as described in
@ref{Walker options}.

The name @samp{xtokid} indicates that it is the ``eXtract TOKens ID
utility''.

@c ************* gkm *********************************************************
@node Past and Future
@chapter Past and Future

@cindex history

@pindex look @r{and @file{mkid} 1}
@cindex McGary, Greg
Greg McGary conceived of the ideas behind the ID utilities when he
began working on the Unix kernel in 1984.  He needed a navigation tool
to help him find his way around the expansive, unfamiliar landscape.
The first @code{id-utils}-like tools were shell scripts, and produced an
ASCII database that looks much like the output of @samp{lid ".*"}.  It
took over an hour on a @sc{vax 11/750} to build a database for a
@sc{4.1bsd} derived kernel.  The first version of @file{lid} used the
@sc{unix} system utility @code{look}, modified to handle very long
lines.

In 1986, Greg rewrote the shell scripts in C to improve performance.
Build times for the ID file were shortened by an order of magnitude.
The ID utilities were first posted to @samp{comp.sources.unix} in
September 1987 under the name @code{id}.

@cindex Horsley, Tom
@cindex Scofield, Doug
@cindex Leonard, Bill
@cindex Berry, Karl
Over the next few years, several versions diverged from the original
source.  Tom Horsley at Harris Computer Systems Division stepped forward
to take over maintenance and integrated some of the fixes from divergent
versions.  A first release of the renamed @file{mkid} @w{version 2} was
posted to @file{alt.sources} near the end of 1990.  At that time, Tom
wrote a Texinfo manual with the encouragement the net community.
(Tom especially thanks Doug Scofield and Bill Leonard whom he dragooned
into helping proofread and edit---they found several problems in the
initial version.)  Karl Berry revamped the manual for Texinfo style,
indexing, and organization in 1995.

In January 1995, Greg McGary reemerged as the primary maintainer and
launched development of @file{mkid} version 3, whose primary new feature
is an efficient algorithm for building databases that is linear in both
time and space over the size of the input text.  (The old algorithm was
quadratic in space so it was incapable of handling very large source
trees.)  For the first time, the code was released under the GNU Public
License.

In June 1996, the package was renamed again to @code{id-utils} and was
released for the first time under FSF copyright as part of the GNU
system.  All programs had their command-line arguments completely
revised.  The @file{mkid} and @file{xtokid} programs also gained a
file-tree walker, so that directory names can be passed on the command
line instead of the names of every individual file.  Greg reorganized
and rewrote most of the Texinfo manual to reflect these changes.

@pindex cscope
@pindex grep
@cindex future
Future releases of @code{id-utils} might include:

@table @bullet

an optional coupling with GNU @code{grep}, so that @code{grep} can use
an ID database for hints

a @code{cscope} work-alike query interface

incremental update of the ID database.

@end table

@c ***************************************************************************
@node Index
@unnumbered Index

@printindex cp

@contents
@bye
